HINTS, TIPS, AND DIRTY TRICKS
     

       So, you wanna win the game?


Reading further may spoil your enjoyment of the game. Not
reading further may cause you many hours of pain and torment
as you try to figure everything out on your own. It's up to you.



       How do I survive at low levels?

Be very, very careful!

                 Dealing with Monsters

If you're playing a warrior, paladin, or ranger, you should have
few problems with the early monsters. Otherwise, the monsters
are almost always stronger than you are, at least until you go up
a couple of levels. Mages should cast MM (magic missile)
twice, then RUN! A kobold can easily kill a 1st-level mage.

Flasks of oil are a very good idea for any low-level character.
They make excellent thrown weapons against weak monsters,
and I once got lucky and killed one of Farmer Maggot's dogs
with 3 or 4 flasks of oil.

               Managing your inventory

It's a good idea not to wear or wield unidentified equipment, and
drinking unidentified potions is a crapshoot at best. The effects
of certain potions are easy to figure out--Clear, Light Brown,
and Icky Green potions are always Water, Apple Juice, and
Slime Mold Juice. (I like to accumulate a few of these and sell
them, just to watch the storekeeper scream.)

I think it's a good idea to sell your unidentified potions and
scrolls when your inventory is full up, at least for the first few
trips into the dungeon. That way, you can find out what they do
when the storekeepers ID them and get a little extra cash
besides. One caveat: generally, you will find a bunch of ID
scrolls the first time you go into the pits. If you have 4 or 5
un-IDed scrolls, consider reading one of them to see what it
does.

Warriors, rogues, and paladins have a helpful ability called
"Pseudo-ID". Basically, this means if you carry an item for a
while, you'll get some feeling which tells you something about
the item. Here's the breakdown:

{special}----> good artifact
{excellent}---->good ego-item (Blessed weapon, Defender, etc.)
{good}----> item with plusses
{average}----> ordinary item
{cursed}----> cursed item
{worthless}----> cursed ego-item (Weapon of Morgul, etc.)
{terrible}----> cursed artifact (all bad except for Calris, Grond,
and the Crown of Morgoth.)

Generally, you should junk all {average} items (unless they're
your arrows/bolts/sling ammo) and ID everything {good} or
better. Every class except warrior will eventually get an ID
spell, so once you have that, ID everything.

If you're playing a priest, you can cast OoD at an object if
you're suspicious about it. OoD will destroy all {cursed} and
{worthless} items, but won't affect artifacts.

Don't carry too much for your strength. If you pick something
up and you suddenly become "Slow(-1)," then consider
dropping something else. Some things are more valuable or
useful than others--wands, most rods, and most staves are
worth bringing out of the dungeon if you know how many
charges they have. Rods of Trap Location and Staves of Object
and Treasure Location are not worth the bother, usually.

            What does that Phial I found do?

ID it, wield it, [[A]]ctivate it. It rocks.

             More Advanced Stuff



                  The Shoot 'n Scoot

Without a doubt, this is the way to take care of pesky tough
monsters. It works for mages, rangers, rogues, and
priests/paladins with the right book, although anyone can use it.
(Just stock up on Phase Door scrolls.) Get into a large room
with the monster you want to kill. Get a heavily enchanted
shooting weapon and some good ammo, or use MM or OoD
(Orb of Draining.) Blast the critter with your weapon, and every
time the monster gets close, Phase Door. You can beat all the
orc uniques this way, and severely damage the health of other
nasties.

Unfortunately, this doesn't work at all if the monster has a
distance attack or summons other creatures.

                  The Back 'n Smack

Closely related to the "Shoot 'n Scoot," this is actually even
more powerful. All you have to do is become faster than the
monster you're fighting by about +10. Potions of Speed/Staves
of Speed/Haste Self will do this for normal speed monsters.
Then simply whack the monster with your melee weapon, then
back up. The monster will follow you, taking its turn to move
instead of attack. Repeat this until the monster dies. Even if the
monster has a distance attack, they won't use it very often,
preferring to get you in the hand-to-hand. This works
surprisingly well against the pesky sons of Mim.

                   The Wail 'n Bail

This is just basic common sense. Go in where the nasties are,
wail on them until you're mostly dead, then teleport out. Go
back to the monsters, wail on them some more, etc.

                   Pound the Hound

How do you deal with pesky, annoying Zephyr Hounds?
(Besides swearing a lot?) Use one of the Hound Trap methods
shown here. Dig out sections of the dungeon if the proper wall
layout doesn't exist. (usually necessary.)



The one you make use of depends on your preparation time and
patience. I generally use the one marked 'fair', as it requires no
digging and can be found almost anywhere. The more advanced
traps are safer, but certain Hounds deep in the dungeon can
walk through walls and kick your butt all the same. . .

                     Resistances

These start becoming absolutely essential around 1000' or
dungeon level 20. Free Action, resistance to paralysis and
ordinary slowing attacks, is fairly easy to find. Almost all
artifact weapons provide it, as do Defenders, Holy Avengers,
and weapons of Westernesse. See Invisible can be found
through rings, most artifacts, and some ordinary ego-weapons.
Do not go below 1000' without these two.

Resistance to the elements becomes essential around 1500'. You
can get these resists from various combinations of weapons and
armor, and you can get them all at once from certain artifacts,
Armor of Resistance, Defender weapons, or a Robe of
Permanence.

Poison resistance, nether resistance, resist disenchantment, and
hold life are the hardest of the remaining resistances to find.
Certain artifacts grant poison resistance, and rings of poison
resistance are rare but there. Nether resistance and hold life are
even more difficult to find, but it is very difficult to survive past
2500' without them. Opinions vary on how far you should
descend without resist poison and resist nether/hold life. I went
to 2500' with a human Ranger lacking all three and survived.
Others say 2000' is too far.

Disenchantment resistance is tough to find and not all that
essential, at least until 2500' or so, as relatively few monsters
before this depth disenchant your equipment. Certain molds,
eyes, and worms, the powerful undead creatures Nightwings,
Nightwalkers, and Black Reavers, and the uniques Mim, Khim,
Ibun, Gorlim, Saruman, the Mouth of Sauron, and Sauron are
the only things which hit to disenchant. Chaos Dragons, Balance
Dragons, and the Tarrasque may breathe disenchantment. You
can try fighting these up close, as they don't breathe as often
when they can melee. The artifacts Rilia, Calris, Belthronding,
Deathwreaker, the armor of Celeborn, and Bladeturner grant
resistance to disenchantment. Certain cloaks, dragon armors,
and armors of Elvenkind may also resist disenchantment.

       Dealing with Mid-level Critters

There are many monsters around 2500' or so that are not worth
fighting. Greater Titans, for instance, are very, very difficult to
kill and don't give much XP. They have decent treasure drops,
but you almost have to fight them in a corridor to cut down on
the monsters they summon. Great Wyrms of any stripe,
however, are worth tons of XP and have very nice treasure
drops. If you have resistance to whatever they breathe and a
way to get to speed +10, you can take them out fairly easily. 

Other monsters which are not really worth the bother are
Drolems, Death Molds, and most Zephyr Hounds. Dracolisks
are borderline--if you have res. nether, kill them if you can!
Resist Chaos also makes it worthwhile to kill Chaos Hounds, as
they're worth a lot of XP.

         The Really Advanced Stuff



               Taking on a Greater Vault

Now and then, you may have noticed huge rooms built of
permanent rock filled with monsters and objects in the dungeon.
These are the fabled Greater Vaults, bane of many a careless
adventurer but a blessing for those who know what they're
doing. This is a picture of a very shallow Vault. Vaults deeper in
the dungeon may contain extremely powerful uniques and more
than one artifact.

The entrances are in the corners. Be very careful, and have a
wand/spell of Teleport Other at the ready, as well as several
potions of Healing. Go in hasted if at all possible. Have as many
resistances as you can. Teleport away if your hitpoints even
begin to run low. Good luck!

     Fighting Monsters who summon Other Monsters

This can be a real nightmare. I fought a Vrock once, which
summoned a pack of Hezrous, one of which summoned a
Nalfeshnee, which summoned a Marilith and a Lesser Balrog.
That was a nasty fight, and one which could've been avoided.
Fight summoners in a corridor, or do some digging and create
the nifty little Anti-Summoning Corridor pictured here:



There are problems with this approach. First, the monster will
only be able to drop two or three objects when you finally kill it.
(You can dig out the yellow sections of wall for a chance at
more treasure.) Second, if the monster summons certain undead
or Ethereal Hounds or Dreads, they will walk through the walls
and kill you anyway. Scrolls or a spell of Mass Genocide will
work wonders here.

            Morgoth, the Lord of Darkness!

Go in with all the Healing and *Healing* potions you can find,
and several scrolls or a spell of Mass Genocide. Spellcasters
should have at least 20 or so Restore Mana potions. Speed is
essential--less than +30 and you're immediate toast. This is the
toughest monster in the game. A mage will have no problems
whatsoever defeating Morgoth--merely cast Globe of
Invulnerability and wail on Morgoth until he's dead. Priests
should use the strategy of the "sea of runes." That is, create a
ring of Glyphs of Warding at least two levels deep around your
character. When Morgoth approaches, hit him with an OoD
barrage. The glyphs will keep Morgoth from summoning
monsters. Teleport Morgoth away when he gets too close to
your runes. 

Rangers should do something similar to the "sea of runes,"
although they will have to use Rune of Protection scrolls.
However, if they are firing Seeker Arrows of Hurt Evil from a
good longbow (like Belthronding), they can pound Morgoth
pretty hard. Paladins can also use the "sea of runes" trick.
Warriors should follow the same advice as rangers, using Rune
of Protection scrolls and arrows/bolts of Hurt Evil fired from a
heavily enchanted shooter. Using a Rod of Teleport Other is also
essential for a warrior. Good luck. You'll need it. 
