
* Check whether Vanilla uses unknown Tiles, blog about it ?




From the monster file : 

 Version stamp (required)

Things to consider : 
  Nobody from after 1600 !!
  Undead : one that jumps on you and adds more weight to the steps
  Undead : one that calls names, the names ones will die in 3 days
  Undead : one that chews all it encounters, first start chewing its own hands
  Undead : the nine caller, pronounces death of nine of his most beloved
  Revenant : Infernal chase with dogs which are unbaptised dead children, Hunter of the Infernal Chase
  Possesed animals in order : horse, dog , goat , crow , pig, always missing head or a member
  hadewijch d'anvers
  wth is triduum ?
  Anakim ... offspring of fallen angels , nephelim ?
 Wormwood  : http://www.vampyra.com/demons/A-Z/w.htm
 TatariGami : Ònameless god ofrage and hate, http://www.vampyra.com/demons/A-Z/t.htm
 Loubin	a haunter of cemeteries, and in France a feeder of corpses
 Drude, female demonic spirit, possesses humans , http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drude

  Lion-bearer, Rath. 'I am a spirit quite incapable of being perceived. Upon all men who lie prostrate with sickness I leap, 
  coming stealthily along; and I render the man weak, so that his habit of body is enfeebled.'

  and the binding their mouths with a bond, and the ruin of their minds, and paining of their bodies.''
  Enpsigos , A spirit, as it were a woman in the form she had. But on her shoulders she had two other heads with hands. Foresight

 Mastema 'Hostility' is the chief of the demons engendered by the fallen Watchers. Mastema is the tester of humans with God's permission.
  This rebel angel is the Accusing Angel of Hebrew mythology. He is the executioner who slaughtered the firstborn of Egypt and who tried, unsuccessfully, to 
murder Moses.

 Djinni's , Earth, Air, Fire (Ifrit) and Water (Marid) 
 According to demonology, Baal (usually spelt 'Bael' in this context; there is a possibility that the two figures aren't connected)
 was ranked as the first and principal king in Hell, ruling over the East. According to some authors Baal is a Duke, with sixty-six legions of demons under 
his command.
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ars_Goetia
 King Baal, ruler over 66 legions
 Duke Agares, ruler over 31 legions
 Prince Vassago, ruler over 26 legions
 Marquis Samigina, ruler over 30 legions
 President Marbas, ruler over 36 legions
 Duke Valefor, ruler over 10 legions
 Marquis Amon, ruler over 40 legions
 Duke Barbatos, ruler over 30 legions
 King Paimon, ruler over 200 legions
  PAIMON: A high-ranking devil, Paimon takes the form of a young woman wearing a crown and riding a camel. 
  He is the Master of Ceremonies in Hell and commands 200 legions of fiends. He supplants mortal thoughts with his own.
 President Buer, ruler over 50 legions
 Duke Gusion, ruler over 40 legions
 Prince Sitri, ruler over 60 legions
 King Beleth, ruler over 85 legions
  One of the governors in Hell, Beleth presides over 85 legions of demons. He rides a pale horse and is announced by a blare of trumpets.
 Marquis Leraje, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke Eligos, ruler over 60 legions
 Duke Zepar, ruler over 26 legions
  Count/President Botis, ruler over 60 legions
 Duke Bathin, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke Sallos, ruler over 30 legions
 Count/President Marax, ruler over 30 legions
 Count Ipos, ruler over 36 legions
 Duke Aim, ruler over 26 legions
 Marquis Naberius, ruler over 19 legions
 Count/President Glasya-Labolas, ruler over 36 legions
 Duke Bune, ruler over 30 legions
 Marquis/Count Ronove, ruler over 19 legions
 Duke Astaroth, ruler over 40 legions
 Marquis Forneus, ruler over 29 legions
 President Foras, ruler over 29 legions
 King Asmodeus, ruler over 72 legions
 Prince/President Gaap, ruler over 66 legions
he is the guide of the four kings (the others being Ziminiar, Corson and Amaymon )
Governor of the southern region of the Pit. Gaap rules 66 legions of demons and manifests himself as a human sporting huge bat wings. 
 Count Furfur, ruler over 26 legions
 Marquis Marchosias, ruler over 30 legions
 Prince Stolas, ruler over 26 legions
 Marquis Phenex, ruler over 20 legions
 Count Halphas, ruler over 26 legions
 President Malphas, ruler over 40 legions
 Count Raum, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke Focalor, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke Vepar, ruler over 29 legions
 Marquis Sabnock, ruler over 50 legions
 Marquis Shax, ruler over 30 legions
 King/Count Vine, ruler over 36 legions
 Count Bifrons, ruler over 60 legions
 Duke Uvall, ruler over 37 legions
 President Haagenti, ruler over 33 legions
 Duke Crocell, ruler over 48 legions
  Another former prince of the angelic Order of Powers, Crocell presides over 48 legions of evil spirits.
  He teaches geometry and the liberal arts and has the power to turn water freezing cold or scalding hot in moments.
 Knight Furcas, ruler over 20 legions
 King Balam, ruler over 40 legions
 Duke Alloces, ruler over 36 legions
 President Caim, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke/Count Murmur, ruler over 30 legions
 Prince Orobas, ruler over 20 legions
 Duke Gremory, ruler over 26 legions
 President Ose, ruler over 30 legions
 President Amy, ruler over 36 legions
 Marquis Orias, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke Vapula, ruler over 36 legions
 King/President Zagan, ruler over 33 legions
 President Volac, ruler over 38 legions
 Marquis Andras, ruler over 30 legions
 Duke Haures, ruler over 36 legions
 Marquis Andrealphus, ruler over 30 legions
 Marquis Cimejes, ruler over 20 legions
 Duke Amdusias, ruler over 29 legions
 King Belial, ruler over 80 legions
 Marquis Decarabia, ruler over 30 legions
 Prince Seere, ruler over 26 legions
 Duke Dantalion, ruler over 36 legions
 Count Andromalius, ruler over 36 legions
In demonology Amaymon is a Prince of Hell, and according to some grimoires, the only one who has power on Asmodai.
Amaymon is said to have a deadly poisonous breath.
Ziminiar or Zymymar is one of the four principal kings that have power on the seventy-two demons constrained by King Solomon,
Corson is one of the four principal kings that have power on the seventy-two demons constrained by King Solomon
Mammon : Avarice : by Binsfeld's classification of demons
  The patron devil of avarice, Mammon tempts men to covet belongings. He is so stooped with the weight from his fall from Heaven that he cannot stand erect 
and spends his days staring at the ground.
 Verrin: impatience; adversary, St. Dominic , first hierarchy of michaelis
 Gresil : Gresil: impurity, uncleanness and nastiness; adversary, St. Bernard , 1st
 Sonnilon :  hate; adversary, St. Stephen.
Second Hierarchy
Karo (demon): unpitying; adversary, St. Vincent
Camal: lust; adversary, St. John the Evangelist
Oeillet: richness; adversary, St. Martin
Rosier: sensuality; adversary, St. Basil
ROSIER: The patron devil of seduction, Rosier tempts humans to fall in love. He puts syrupy words of love in the mouths of mortals and causes 
them to act like fools. 
Soufflet: disobedience; adversary, St. Bernard
[edit]
Third Hierarchy
Belial: arrogance; adversary, St. Francis of Paula
Olivier: fierceness, greediness and envy; adversary, St. Lawrence
 Once an Archangel, Olivier now encourages mortals to be cruel and insensitive to the poor.
Jouvart: sexuality; adversary, not cited.
Pithius: liars and liar spirits, by barret
Merihem , pestilences and spirits that cause pestilences


ADRAMALECH: The King of Fire. Originally a Throne angel, Adramelech is now an archdemon and a great minister of Beelzebub's Order of the Fly. 
  When called, he manifests himself in the form of a mule or a peacock. He was 
  overthrown by the angels Uriel and Raphael during the War in Heaven. He is in charge of the Devil's attire and livery and is the patron of hypocrisy. 
CARNIVEAN: The patron devil of lewd and obscene behavior, he tempts people to act shamelessly. He is often invoked by witches during a Sabbat. His adversary 
in Heaven is John the Evangelist.
CARREAU: Once a prince of the angelic Order of Powers, Carreau makes people harden their hearts. His adversary in Heaven is Vincent and Vincent Ferrer.
DAGON: Dagon was the national god of the Philistines (i.e. Goliath), appearing in the form of a kind of merman with the torso of a man and the body of a 
fish. He serves as the pantry chef in Hell's kitchen.
FORCAS: A senator in Hell, Forcas spends his infernal days teaching rhetoric, logic, and mathematics. 
He is the master of the Devil's stables and can render objects invisible at will. When invoked, he can help find lost objects. (Pardon me, but I can't find 
one bad thing about this guyÉ)
FURCALOR: A murderous fallen angel and a former member of the angelic Order of Thrones, Furcalor enjoys sinking warships. He appears as a human with the 
wings of a griffin.
GRESSIL: Once a prince in the angelic Order of Thrones, the lecherous Gressil now tempts men with impurity and slothfulness. His adversary in Heaven is 
Saint Bernard (not the dog, mind you).
HAURUS: One of the 72 devils King Solomon shut up in a brass vessel and threw into a lake, Haurus is a leader in Hell and is able to divine the truth about 
events occurring in the past or future.
   He may take the form of a leopard, a human, or some combination of both.
HORNBLAS: A patron devil of musical discord, he blows the trumpet to gather the ministry of Hell together.
IMAMAIH: Imamaih oversees voyages and can be invoked to destroy and humiliate enemies.
MISROCH: Misroch is the Devil's cook and inspires hatred between men. He was originally an angel of the Order of Principalities and worshipped by the 
Assyrians.
  Misroch has the head of an eagle and was at one time the guardian of the famed Tree of Immortality, the fruit of which he uses in his recipes.
 RIMMON: Rimmon is the only doctor in Hell. In Babylonian times, he was believed to be the conjurer of thunder and storms. His symbol is the pomegranate.
SAMMAEL: His name is a combination of the Hebrew sam, meaning poison, and el, or angel. He is the devil of death and prince among demons and magicians.
  In some traditions, it is he who slithers into the Garden of Eden and seduces Eve, thereby impregnating her with Cain. Sammael is reportedly a handsome,
  redheaded young man and is quite difficult for females to resist. He is said to have a great appreciation for human art and considered to be the first art 
critic.
SUCCOR-BELOTH: Another indignant devil who tempts men to lechery. Succor-Beloth presides over the Devil's harem. (Woo!! What a job!  )
VERRIER: Verrier tempts men to disobey by making their necks too stiff to bow to the yoke of obedience. 
  In other words, he encourages revolution. His adversary in Heaven is Saint Bernard (same saint, not the same dog).
XAPHAN: A rabble-rouser of the worst sort, Xaphan suggested the rebel angels set fire to Heaven during the War of the Angels. 
  His idea met with a warm reception, but before a spark could fly, the lot of them were cast into the Abyss. Xaphan fell hard thanks in part to his 
fiendish inventiveness. 
  Now he fans the Flames of Damnation. A set of bellows is his symbol.
 Alal, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alal , demons calling men into sin.
 Apollyon , leading the locust-like swarm of demons that will be released in the End Times:
 Yes Romanian folklore will be added, they have tons of catholics as well
Mandragora , demon familiars

Geleontes
Hopletes
Argadeis
Aegicoreis
Cypriot 
Aegean island people
Ionia people
 Colchis, Illyria, Thrace, Egypt, Cyrenaica, southern Gaul, east and northeast of the Iberian peninsula, Iberia and Taurica.
Athens, Sparta, Corinth, and Thebes
Argus and Achaia.
Attica

Malians
Ainians
Oitaians
Carians
Minoans -> Myceans ( Mycenaean )
Cyprus, Syria, Anatolia, Egypt, Mesopotamia
Ionian Greeks
Trojans
Achaeans ( collective names , like Danaans , like Argives )
Achaea, Corinthia and Argolis
Hittite
The people of Ahhiyawa
Aramaeans


From Acient people
Aramaeans
From Acient greekss
Aeolians
Nicomedian


V:0.8.6

