INTRODUCTION TO CHARACTER GENERATION

Angband is a roleplaying game, in which you, the player, control a
character in the world of Angband. Perhaps the most important thing you
control is the birth of your character, in which you choose or allow to be
chosen various attributes that will affect the future life of your character. 

Character creation, or birth, is controlled through a variety of choices as to
constraints on the type of character you wish to play, followed by a series
of random calculations to generate ("roll up") a random character matching
the appropriate constraints. 

Once your character has been generated, you will be given the choice to
generate a new character obeying the same constraints, and once you have
generated more than one character, you can switch back and forth between
the two most recent characters, until you are presented with a personality
that you feel comfortable with. You may start the entire process over at
any time. 

Once you have accepted a character you will asked to provide a name for
the character. In general, the actual choice of a name is not important, but
do keep in mind that it may have some effect on the game itself. For
example, on some machines, the chatacter name determines the filename
that will be used to save the character to disk. On others, the character
name specifies special "pref" files. And the character name is used on the
high score list. 

=== Character Characteristics ===

Each character has three primary attributes, sex, race, and class, that
are chosen before the character is generated, and which will stay fixed
for the entire life of that character.  These attributes have many effects,
which will be mentioned as they come up.  Keep in mind that in the current
version of Angband, your choice of race may restrict your choice of class.

Each character has a few secondary attributes, height, weight, social class,
and background history, which are randomly determined, but which are affected
by the sex and race of the character.  In general, these attributes are only
used to provide "flavor" to the character, to assist in the roll playing, but
they do have a few minor effects on the game.  For example, background history
affects social class, which affects the amount of money the character will
start with.  And weight affects carrying capacity and bashing ability.

Each character also has six primary "stats", strength, intelligence, wisdom,
dexterity, constitution, and charisma, which modify the abilities of the
character in a variety of ways.  Every stat has a numerical value, ranging
from a minimum of 3, up to a normal maximum of 18, and even higher, into
the "percentile" range, represented as "18/01" through "18/220".

Each character also has several primary "skills", disarming, magic devices,
saving throws, stealth, searching ability, searching frequency, fighting skill,
and shooting skill, which are derived from the character's race, class, level,
stats, and current equipment.

Each character may have one or more "racially intrinsic skills", based on
the race of the character.  These may include special resistances, or even
abilities such as infravision.

Each character has experience, which increases as the character becomes more
experienced, and a level, which is based on experience, and also on race and
class.  As the experience rises, so does the level, and as the level rises,
certain other abilities and characteristics rise as well.  Deep down inside,
the real objective of the game is to increase your experience, and certain
other characteristics, and also to collect useful items, to give you a decent
chance against the great Serpent of Chaos.  Certain monsters can "drain" your
experience, and thus your level, which will cause you to lose all of the
effects of the higher level.  Luckily, you can restore drained experience
through magical means, or by simply regaining the experience all over again.

Each character has some gold, which can be used to buy items from the shops
in the town, and which can be obtained not only from selling items to the
shops, but also by taking it from dead monsters and by finding it hidden in
the dungeon.  Each character starts out with some gold, the amount of which
is based on the characters social class (higher is better), charisma (higher
is better), sex (female characters start with more gold), and other stats
(less powerful characters start with more gold).  Each character also starts
out with a few useful items, which may be kept, or sold to a shop-keeper for
more gold.

Each character has an armor class, representing how well the character can
avoid damage.  The armor class is affected by dexterity and the equipment.

Each character has hit points, representing how much damage the character can
sustain before he dies.  Your hit points are derived from your race, class,
level, and constitution, and can be temporarily boosted by magical means.
Hit points may be regained by resting, or by a variety of magical means.

Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how many spells
(or prayers) a character can cast (or pray).  Your spell points are derived
from your class, level, and intelligence (for spells) or wisdom (for prayers).
Spell points may be regained by resting, or by a few magical means.