Kangband 2.8.2e is a variant of Angband 2.8.2  The major claims to fame are the expanded town area, new classes (illusionist & druid), and new spell structure.

Now the player can visit the castle, library, gambling house, their class-specific building (tower of sorcery, order of paladins, etc.)

I have also added the illusionist class, druid class, & some additions from GW-Angband.

The game also includes a nice structure for quests.

New to 2.8.2e from the last version of 2.8.2c
-----------

NOTE: There was no 2.8.2d released, this was an internal version that never saw the light of public.

The wilderness file and quests are read from files.  A player when born can pick a set of quests, i.e. a plot to last that character's life.  The game supports 10 different plots.

Artifacts and uniques will no longer appear in quest level if already seen/killed.

The druid class was added.

The spells for the four magic classes were completely revamped.  The spells.xls
excel spreadsheet details some of the changes.  This was a huge undertaking and
hopefully I make these characters more powerful in magic (earlier versions reduced combat skills) without losing the balance of the game.  New spells, new effects, increasing power with single spells based on level, removed redundant spells, more spells.

Bug of not being able to leave arena fixed.

-----------

New to 2.8.2c from the last version of 2.8.2b
Added vaults from Zangband.

Fixed bugs (see bugs.txt included in the kangdocs directory)

Quests are now user-defineable!  I have included a document that
describes how to create them.

There are two new "buildings" - a weaponsmaster and beastmaster.

If the character does well, can visit all other buildings (except
for that hidden thieves lair)

-----------

New to 2.8.2b from the last version of 2.8.1a.  The first new addition
is the obvious use of the 2.8.2 source code.  Secondly, a wilderness
has been build outside the expanded town.  The stairs to the dungeon
are in the wilderness.  The mage can now handle the dagger or quarterstaff
without being encumbered.  There are terrains of trees, mountains, water,
and lava in the game.  Most importantly, the QUESTS are now implemented
with the castle building.

This particular zip file is the source code.  Kangband should compile on
other systems just as easy as Angband 2.8.1 did.  I did not make any changes
that would (I think) affect compiling.

This source code is also set by default to compile for DOS.  Copy over the
correct makefile, verify config.h, h-config.h, h-system.h, etc.

Please direct feedback, comment, complaints, compliments, etc. to
wigle@fmmail.uc.edu

Thank you and I hope you enjoy this addition.  All help on this variant
can be found in the "kangdocs" directory of the variant.
