Manual for FuryBand

FuryBand is very fun 2d RPG, set in the Lord of the Rings universe. The object of the game is to kill the necromancer of dol gulder. 
After that, there will be several other missions that you have to accomplish, ranging from finding the one ring, to defending Bree against a Nazgul.

The game is relatively easy to learn, but hard to win. Don't expect to win the first try, and expect to die often. When you die, you have to restart the
entire game. While this is hard, it makes the game more interesting, and more realistic.


The main help file can be found by hitting shift-/ while in the game. From there, you can read the complete command descriptions, how attacks work, and more.

There are 3 commands that are not listed in the help files yet.

'W' (that is shift-w): Lets you use your portable hole if you are wielding it. You can use it as an extra house.
'J' Lets you change the name of your inventory. If the item has the "can be upgraded with gold" ability, you can spend money to give it more powers with this
'X' Yells, waking up all the monsters near you. 

If you need any assistance with this, post a message in my forum, at http://www.furytech.net/phpBB2/index.php.

Enjoy the game.


Engine Notes

The Fury-Engine is opensource. Feel free to write mods for it, and upload to my site, at www.furytech.net. Any questions about modifying the game, can be
directed to my forum.

Credits

Thanks to DarkGod, the designer of TOME
Thanks to Dan Rosenberry for the 1 Skill point FF reward patch
Thanks to the runner of KillerBunnies.org for his patches
Thanks to Furiosity, for this was originally based off of Theme
Thanks to the programmer of NewAngband, for some of the flags
Thanks to Zizzo for the Acanorum and the new Runecraft coding
Thanks to the designer of Hengband, for the numerous monsters that I added from that
Thanks to Burb for some of his special levels
Thanks to the programmers of Adamant, T-Plus, Tome and a half, and anyone else that I forgot
for some of the races and classes.
Thanks to ISNorden for some of weapon ideas
Thanks to CosmicGerbil for the help files
Also, thanks to everyone on the TOME forums for assistance with programming

Permissions: Feel free some or all of this game for other mods or other angband-like games. Just give me credit, and let me know that you are using it.

Major differences between FuryBand and TOME

More towns
More powers
More monsters
More races, subraces, and skills
The 'U' menu now supports using the @ key for macros, thanks to killer bunnies
The corruption sheet will tell you if you have unid'd fates, thanks to killer bunnies
The portable hole is back, and everyone can use it by hitting 'W'. Only humans start with them though
I brought back the old bounty system. To access it, visit the black market
Runecraft is fixed, thanks to Zizzo
Viewing an instrument or maiablade in a store will bring up a message asking whether you want to see the spells or id info, thanks to killer bunnies
Some new special levels, some by me, some by Burb
Dragons and trolls are much stronger
Weapons have new damage die, thanks to RavenRed for the ideas
Magic is innate, no books required except for the god schools, music, and maiaology
Demons have been renamed en masse to Maia
New Weapon brands: BRAND_DEATH, BRAND_LIGHT (from Newangband), BRAND_DARK (from Newangband), BRAND_MAGIC (from Newangband), and BRAND_WATER
New Weapon Flags: ONLY_MALE, ONLY_FEMALE (both from Newangband), AURA_ACID, AURA_COLD, SENS_COLD
New Monster Race Flags: STARWARS, NORSE
New Monster Resists: RES_DARK (from Newangband), RES_LIGHT (from Newangband), RES_NETH (from Newangband), RES_MANA, and IM_MANA
Many more things that I am forgetting right now, read the changelog for details.



