-1.0.1-

Fixed priest/paladin spell list, dungeon books were broken
Changed title in files.txt, 'V' command gives correct info now
Removed limit on number of traps when in nightmare mode
Activations of wands/staffs/rods/artifacts do not use player level anymore

-1.0.2-

Nightmare mode clears the map every player turn now, instead of each round

When in astral and nightmare modes, cannot get below level 97 when
descending more than one level at a time
Also, does not continuously forget the map

Astral characters can now move through walls, and start with
lanter/oil or torches, as walls are not lit up

Choose classes at start of game. Hit ESCAPE to stop choosing classes

Got rid of restriction on rogues/tricksters that they could only have
one other class, can't remember why I decided to do that anyway...
Half-elves can only have 2 classes now, not 3

Gets attribute bonuses/penalties from all classes now
Second class now needs twice as much experience, third *3. fourth *4
Skills are an average of what is granted to each available class
HP are based on average of hitdie from all available classes
Mana/Piety are displayed regardless of which class is active, and are
initialised properly at character birth

Added realm information on character info screen. Character can have a
magery realm (magic or illusion) and a prayer realm (holy or death)

Equipment : spellcasters get first spellbooks, everyone except monks
gets a melee weapon, archers and rangers get a missile weapon and ammo
Warriors : chainmail
Mages or Illusionists : wizard hat
Priest or Death Priest : ! of cure critical wounds
Rogue or Trickster : scroll of teleport
Ranger : fur cloak
Paladin : large metal shield
Archer : potion of speed
Berserker: ! of berserk strength
Monk : pair of sandals

Changed brand_ammo to be more efficient (thanks to takkaria)

Boosts to infravision/stealth (from spells, potions, etc) give +3 now

Added scroll of Mundanify, returns weapon or armour to base type,
without enchantments

-1.0.3-

Changed Elf to Grey-Elf - has sustain intelligence as well as resist
light, intelligent but weak, good at devices, poor at melee, 2
classes, likes bows

Examining an item in the home displayed the item as if it was
identified, even if it wasn't.
The spell-info for the mage's fire-bolt spell was used for the stone
to mud spell.
Potions of life will now restore stats before healing to provide full
health even if CON was drained.

Berserkers now gain the effects of berserk rage while confused or cut
(in addition to potions/spells and being near death), and while raging
gain better bonuses to hit, bonuses to damage, and worse AC
Berserkers can now stun monsters only when scoring a critical hit

Added potion of rejuvenation - restores 1/3rd of total HP and mana

Unworking spells (from illusion/death realms) are not shown in books anymore
Boccob's and Bigby's books have the right spells in them now

-1.0.4-

Added Crusader - similar to Warrior/Paladin, learns innate powers, can have one
active power and one passive power in action at the same time. Active powers
are shown in blue, current active power in light blue. Passive powers are shown
in green, current passive power in light green.
Active powers are used in attacking monsters, while passive powers are
defensive. Some active powers add a bonus or temporary branding to
melee/missile weapons, and to unarmed attacks if the character is also a
monk. If the character is not a monk, they must use a weapon to take advantage
of these powers.

Half-elves and cavemen can have 3 classes now, in addition to high-elves and
dunadan.
Holy Priests cannot be Rogues OR Tricksters now. Berserkers can be Monks.
Berserkers have 1/2 chance of decreasing length of berserk strength each turn.

List of effects ('~' then '4') is ordered, with most used effects first.

Made regeneration *5 to regen amount instead of *2, and made it require more
food.

At birth, in easy mode, cannot get an ego-weapon of a magic/prayer realm if
character cannot use that realm.

Fixed calculation of best psuedo-id

Changed how experience is divided between classes, this works for XP gained
from killing monsters, identifying items, and potions of experience.
Number of Place of class                 Example of 60 XP
classes   First   Second  Third   Fourth First   Second  Third   Fourth
1         *1                             +60
2         *2/3    *1/3                   +40     +20
3         *1/2    *1/3    *1/6           +30     +20     +10
4         *2/5    *3/10   *1/5    *1/10  +24     +18     +12     +6
Calculation of experience factor stays the same, ie second class needs *2 XP,
third needs *3, etc
Changed how XP gain code works, now mostly uses gain_exp_all() which can use
one of three methods of allocating experience

If player has 'persistence', ie conditions do not timeout, then do not rest
until starving because game is waiting for some conditions to timeout, such as
slowing or confusion.

Fixed : astral characters in walls can be attacked now

-1.0.5-

Crusader powers of Heroism and Berserk Strength become passive powers, thus the
only active powers are those that affect weapons/(unarmed combat if monk).

Added Shadow race : Can avoid death by entering astral mode (unless already
astral or on the surface), but loses all gold, most inventory/equipment
(artifacts and items at home are safe, others have a chance of being lost), and
all but 1/10th of experience. Regains body upon returning to the surface, and
loses benefits of astral form. Unlike characters who choose 'astral mode' at
birth, Shadows can use word of recall freely. Can have up to 4 classes. Resists
cold, poison, darkness and nether, has feather fall, regeneration, and see
invisible. When in astral form, gains the benefits of speed, continual light,
telepathy, slow digestion and can pass through walls. Gains experience
slowly. Shadows gain little sustenance from food.

Amulet of Aid : activates to deal with one of these : slowness, blindness,
confusion, fear, hallucination, poison, cuts, stunning, low hp (< 9/10ths), or
hunger. Chooses randomly from whichever of these the character is suffering
from.

When 'I'nspecting artifacts and magical devices (wands, staffs, rods), chance
to activate or use the item is described (only if activation is known, or type
of device is known). (calculation is from sCthangband)

Added class : Undead Slayer. Gets slow but heavy pseudo-id, is strong, wise and
healthy, but not very intelligent, has a good saving throw, and is nearly as
good in combat as a warrior.
Undead slayers get piety from killing undead monsters. Their reward depends on
the level of the monster, and is doubled if the monster is a unique. Their
piety does not regenerate over time.
They use this piety to pray (with 'p' key).

Easy mode gives more useful ego enchantments for weapons.

-1.0.6-

Nightmare mode no longer has permanent amnesia, it was too annoying
Got rid of Shadow race, too hacky

Added Shifter class: has a number of different forms, each form has access to a
number of different powers and intrinstics. Forms require experience before
they can be accessed, and although they do not cost mana to assume, the shifter
may not get it right the first time - their chance of success is affected by
dexterity. Powers require mana to use, but are always successfull. Shifter's
mana is affected by their intelligence.

Hide how much piety an undead slayer has if the adult_hidden option is set

Added Slayer powers of Blessing, Shield and Healing

Point-based character creation no longer gives race/class bonuses twice
Don't use non-maximize mode when using point-based creation

Nightmare mode does not prevent connecting stairs when in astral mode, but this
does not guarantee a stair when starting the game
Nightmare mode no longer ignores FORCE_DEPTH monster flag (Sauron and Morgoth
were killing too many of my astral characters)

When choosing a random class, there is also a chance of NOT choosing another
class, but only if the player has at least one class already

When casting spells 'm' or praying 'p', switch to relevant class silently.
Also reorder books (if used) so that first usable book is 'a',
etc. (Also silently).
Now, Crusaders, Shifters and other spellcasters (which use the 'm'
key) cannot combine.

Updated table of allowed multiclass cominations in lib/help/multi.txt
and explanations

-1.0.7-

Added spell scrolls - can find spell scrolls in shops, and the dungeon. Temple
only sells/buys priestly scrolls, magic shop only sells/buys magery/illusion
scrolls, alchemist buys both (but does not sell them). 
Spell is cast at level 1 by default, or at player's level if the player has a
relevant class.
There are four svals - one for each type of spell book. The sval of the scroll
is always obvious, but the actual spell is not known unless the scroll has been
identified (even if it has been used/encountered before).

When destroying spell books, create (and put in inventory) a random number of
scrolls from spells in the book.

Added wizard command to 'S'huffle stores - sometimes causes
segmentation fault tho.

Hide success chance of using magical devices when in hidden knowledge mode

Fixed message given when creating spell scrolls from spellbooks to deal with
pluralization correctly. No message is given if no scrolls are created

Switch automagically when using 'G' or 'b' commands if there is only one class
which can use books and that class is not active.
Ask player to switch classes manually if there is more than one class.

Fade out price of items in stores if they're not affordable
Fixed psuedo-id (again) - now uses average value of all available classes, but
gives heavy psuedo-id if player has one of Warrior, Rogue, Trickster, Paladin,
Berserker or Slayer

Recognize picked-up spell scrolls if the spell is known

Added Talismans (amulets of spell) - contain a random spell. Can be activated
once identified. Timeout is randomly between spell level * 5 and spell level *
10. Sold by Magic shop.

Changed Rogue to Thief
Thief gains bonuses to stealth and searching from level, but has less spells
available now
Removed Trickster

Added Runecaster class
      Starts with a talisman of Magic Missile
      If in easy mode, also gets talismans of Detect Monsters and Cure Light
      Wounds
      When reading an identified spell/prayer scroll, can copy it into a
      talisman (if one is being worn) instead of casting it
      Can use mana to activate (charging) talismans, cost = turns left / 5 + 1
      Uses Runecaster level when casting spells from scrolls/talismans	
      Gets more pages from books
      - + (level / 20) to random number of pages generated
      - 1 + (level / 15) guaranteed pages from town books
      - (level / 25) guaranteed pages from dungeon books

Inform player when rods and talismans recharge
Talismans have a 1/10 chance of recharging each turn if in the inventory - this
chance is decreased by Runecrafter level

Fixed food giving only 1/10th of nutrition it should have done

Update charging rods/talismans in inventory/equipment windows
Drop scrolls from destoryed books if no room in inventory
Added charms - same as talismans, but rings
Now can add spells to any charm/talisman in inventory or equipment
Fixed game crashing when 'I'nspecting an amulet of Aid

Added Book of Infinite Spells - read like a scroll, but with a 1/100 chance of
disappearing, and a 1/3 chance of changing spell every time it is
used. Runecasters can copy spells from it to talismans and charms. It is a very
rare and deep item

-1.0.8-

Merged Crusader and Undead Slayer classes. Now Crusaders can use both powers
(with 'm') and prayers (with 'p'). They gain piety from killing evil monsters,
demons and undead. Changed prayers and powers

Non-Runecasters can only get a max of 1 page from books now, and not always
that
Changed how many scrolls Runecasters get from destroying books
Non-Runecasters now find it twice as hard to use talismans/charms
Fixed talismans/charms of mage spells Treasure/Object Detection being level 99

At class selection, really can't hit ESCAPE before choosing one class now

Monsters can now target spells at players in walls, and are themselves not
protected by walls

Added Dark Slayer class - uses Death prayer books, gets piety from killing
living monsters (without empty minds or cold blood), which decreases over time.

Decrease piety of Crusaders over time, takes longer as Crusader level increases
Maia cannot be Death Priest or Slayer now
Changed slightly which classes can combine with which, updated
explanations in multi.txt
Crusaders/Slayers start with more piety now
Crusaders/Slayers are now not left completely in the dark about their piety
rating when in 'hidden' mode
Crusaders get difrerent powered versions of some prayers, ie Healing
and Dispel Evil
Shifters get forms earlier, added Ent and Mind Flayer forms, changed
intrinstics given

Increased number of traps in nightmare mode

Book spells which caster doesn't have enough mana/piety to use are darkened

Changed how long Berserkers can stun monsters for, it was too long

Added some Shifter powers and forms
Fixed Shifter stat bonusese from forms, added some intrinstics to some forms
Monks have half the normal number of blows if they are wearing a shield
Monk/Shifters do extra damage when in Arctic Bear, Wyvern, Umber Hulk and Chaos
Drake forms, and also Colbrans/Ice Trolls/Chaos Drakes get an elemental brand
with their unarmed attacks
Calculation of blows needed to kill monster (in monster memory) takes account
of crusader and shifter modifiers (brands and claws)
Damage shown in character info screen takes account of shifter claws,
but not brands
Some gloves and boots help monks do more damage, but sandals penalize
them slightly
Added ego-item boots of Kicking (not sandals or soft leather boots tho)

1.0.9

Easy mode gives even more gold and better objects, but score /5 instead of /2
Changed Hp calculation to really give an average, rather than using best value
Removed Ranger and Paladin classes
Thiefs cannot use magic any longer, they will be given other abilities later
Kobolds can be Death Priests
Archers get less chance of preferred missiles breaking
Runecasters are even worse at melee/missile combat now
Runecasters start with talisman of magic missile and 2 charms from
detect monsters, detect traps/doors, light area and phase door
Death Priests can use scythes without penalties, and scythes can be
weapons of death
Heavy armour penalizes spell failure rates much more now, it was too low
Added IGNORE_ flags to death books
Spell scrolls from destroyed books are worth only 10% of original price
Half as many spell/prayer scrolls in shops and a few more books
Added some new flavours from Sangband
Added spiked club, kite shield, steel gauntlets
A few artifacts have their base type changed
Added brand_lite and weapons of magery/illusion/holiness/death to
randart generation code
Added Staff of Suprises, like Wand of Wonder, chooses a random effect

Changed the way crusaders and slayers piety decreases - now loses more
at higher levels, as it is harder to keep their deity pleased. At
level 1, loses 1 piety per 50 turns, up to level 50 and losing 1 piety
every turn. Also, it no longer decreases over time in town (but you
don't get any piety from level 0 monsters)
Crusaders/slayers xp penalty increased to 50
Crusaders gain a small amount of piety from destroying Death books,
Slayers get the same from Holy Prayer books, but neither will ever get
spell scrolls from these books
Slayers now get a list of powers similar to those that Crusaders get
Crusader prays from Holy Prayer books just like Slayer prays from Death books,
instead of having a separate list of prayers
Added meditation power, piety decreases 5 times as fast, prayers are easier and
those that increase in power with player level are twice as effective
Added weapon of darkness for slayers, has chance of scaring monster each hit,
decreases player's light radius by 1 (unless that would mean no light
available), and grants resistance to light

Cancelling spells that require directions, identify, recharge and
enchanting costs no mana now
Added a command to show the time of day (control-T).
Changed and cleaned up monster recall colours

Shortened 'effects' list (one of the '~' screens) and divided effects
into 3 types - attack forms (bolt, bolt or beam, beam, and ball),
attack types (type of element, eg fire or chaos), and other effects
(eg Satisfy Hunger or Phase Door).

Mundanify scroll gives same question as Enchant scrolls
Amnesia makes character forget the town, also affects astral characters and
prevents them from knowing the level
Fixed giving more gold in easy mode when using point-based stats
Added ego-items for charms/talismans, (Glowing) or (Indestructible)
Cancelling staffs/rods of id does not take time
Spell failure chance is set to 0% if it would have gone below that
before penalties are added

1.1.0

Redid calculation of how many scrolls runecasters get from books<br>
Groups of monsters are scattered
No unique monsters are generated for astral characters, they have to
go to the surface first
Changed how black market gets items, tied closer to player depth
Show extra might in multiplier of missile launcher
Changed message when attacking monsters to 'you punch it' if no weapon is
wielded, monks using unarmed combat get 'you kick it' half the time
Added number of shots to kill a monster to monster memory
Added some more weapons and body armour

Added shifter power to 'unshift', ie return to default form, 0% failure chance
If shapeshifted, show current form on character info screen
Fixed mindflayer form giving bonus to str/con instead of penalty

Fixed some polearms having the wrong tval in k_info.txt
Priests/Crusader/Slayer now have -1 to Int (was -3), Mage/Illusionist
has -1 to Wis (was 0), Monk has +1 to Wis (was -1).
Fixed spells in Purifications and Healing
Crusader/Slayer haste and infravision stacks with temporary haste/infra
Fixed unid'd missile weapons/ammo showing damage/to-hit on 'C' screen
Items give exact chance to be activated/used now, instead of estimate
Quick-start added (broke savefile compatibility)

1.1.1

Added Sorceror class. Learns spells from spell scrolls (max of 20
spells, after that can replace known spells), can get spell scrolls
from books like a Runecaster.

Fixed bugs
Crusaders/Slayers now get no scrolls from opposing prayerbooks
Failing to use staffs/rods now takes a turn
If chance to use/activate an item is <1%, say 'you have less than 1%
chance' instead of 'you have 0% chance'
Dark Slayers power of Stealth wasn't doing anything
Spells that mages can't use (Treasure/Object Detection) don't show up
in their spellbooks anymore

Shifter bonus/penalty to stats is shown on character screen with
temporary stat reductions, in umber for a bonus and yellow for a
penalty
(stats are shown on main screen the same as before, green except for
when reduced, then in yellow)

