NPPAngband 0.4.1

New features:
Player speed display color changes color if slowed or hasted.
Rogue/Brigand player ghosts only get the summon/thief spell if they are over level 50.
The study notification tells the player how many spells they can gain (by Diego Gonzalez).
Temporary resists are displayed on screen.  (by Diego Gonzalez).
Added a prompt to confirm prices for potions of healing and life.
Slightly changed the price of some services.
With XP_Toggle option on, display says "next instead of "exp".
Made a player ghost template for Kurt Tannert.
Lessened the maximum depth enforcement for certain nests/pits.  Came up 
with a new way to enforce quests for nests/pits contain challenging types of monsters.
Made the nests/pit quests slightly less difficult.
Changed the configuration of a couple vaults.
Monsters on level quests are marked as quest monsters, so they don't get 
affected by destruction/banishment just like other quest monsters.
On occasions where the player is prompted to enter a name for a random 
artifact and does not enter anything, a random one is assigned.
Made it a little harder for randarts to have immunities.
Made randart quest rewards a little less powerful and more rare.
Made most "in-game" randarts a little less powerful.
Made the "order dungeon spellbook" service more expensive.
Only 50% of the monsters on themed quest levels are asleep.
Increased the possibility of stores carrying unusual items.
Increased the possibility of generating themed dungeon levels.
Fixed some instances where the monster list was not updated properly.
Raised the price to fireproof spellbooks.
Reduced the number of treasure drops for hydras.
Added an item "autoinscribe" feature coded by David Vestal.
Items only show up on the squelch and knowledge screens after the player 
has actually seen them.
Made custom artifact rewards less likely, as well as making artifacts as 
quest rewards a little less likely to be created.
Added a new, rare *Paur gauntlet with all 5 temporary elemental resists.
Made the following changes to themed levels:
-smaller levels
-less monsters
-monsters more consistently challenging
Elemental dragon armor and shields now also activate for temporary elemental 
resists as well as elemental breath.
Added a color patch that supports up to 128 different colors in the game.
Added an additional 16 base colors.
Made the custom artifact quest reward less common.
Changes the number of artifact rarity rolls from 4 to 2 when doing quest 
rewards (this makes artifact rewards less common as quest rewards).
Chaos resist prevents a player from getting confused.
The temple now sells identify scrolls.
Added mass identify staff, plus mass identify spell and prayer.
Added a rod of *identify* and rod of mass identify.
Assigned the stairs tilesets to up and down shafts
Changes the frequency of the various dragon scale armor ego-types.
Monster information now displays in the monster sub-window and the 
player scrolls through monsters in the knowledge screens (patch provided by Cyrus Dolph)
Added new player birth options, birth_no_store_services, birth_no_player_ghosts, birth_no_xtra_artifacts, and 
birth_no_quests for people who want a more “4gai Vanilla Angband-ish” game.
Added Eytan Zwieg’s increase hp when player gains levels patch.
Experience gain from monster death is re-calculated and reduces when the increase causes the player to gain
a level (to limit a low-level player jumping many levels when killing a quest or OOD monster).
Made monster missile attacks (arrows, shots, bolts, boulders) 
occasionally miss or bounce off the shield, and AC helps reduce damage from these attacks.

Fixed bugs:
Monsters were casting spells after every melee attack.
The player ghost names of Pedro Gomez-Esteban and Diego Gonzalez were 
not displaying properly.
Confused monsters who never move occasionally moved.
Potions of resistance were not giving player all 5 temporary resists.
Cleaned up the service display for purchasing dungeon spellbooks and 
added the price of each book.
Hidden mimics no longer are counted in the monster display list.
Corrected the spelling of "sapphire"
Corrected the pluralized form of "swordsman" to "Swordsmen".
Themed levels had more monsters than intended due to a formula error.
Monster display window was listing hidden mimics.
Monsters holding Quest artifacts can no longer be killed by monsters 
with the RF2_KILL_BODY flag.
Fixed the Tiles/graphics modes.
Re-named creeping sapphires, rubies, opals, and diamonds to fix the plural form.
Some objects without activations was displaying "It activates for " when they were inspected.
Spaces with monster traps were being counted as "empty" floor spaces.
Monsters pushed into a new space what had a trap on it were not being 
checked to set off the trap.
In the IBM build, dead character savefiles would not load.
When the player left a vault quest level with the artifact, they could 
return to the same depth before they visited the guild, and the game would generate a new quest vault with a copy of the artifact.
Fixed a bug that occasionally shortened a monster name (code fix provided by David Vestal).
The cause-hunger spell was missing from monster lore.
The number of attacks indicated when inspecting a weapon was still 
occasionally different than the actual blows with the weapon in some obscure situations.
Fixed a typo in the description of the nightwalker.
Reduced the amount of some of the higher level coins.
Fixed a bug in the monster flow code that was causing the game to 
crash on RISC-OS ports.
Resist Poison Activation was activating for resist cold.
Notetaking feature was using one file for all characters on UNIX 
systems. 
Down shafts were still occasionally being built one level above quest levels.
The messages about "fleeing in terror" are followed by a message that 
makes sense if they keep heading straight for the player.
Fixed the description for probing to indicate it requires a target.
Made the damage for staves and rods of light 6d8, consistent with the descriptions.
Fixed some inconsistent words in the quest help file.
Rings of poison and nether resistance had the same TVAL/SVAL combination.
Some of the tilesets in the Windows version were obsolete files.
Corrected the written note for when player ghosts were killed.
The object level during store object creation was wrong, mmaking
some items harder to find than they should have been.


NPPAngband 0.4.0

New features
Re-did dragon scale mail objects are dragon, medium dragon, ancient, 
and great wyrn.  Added dragon scale shields in addition to dragon scale mail.  
The different types of dragon scale mail & shields are ego items rather than objects.
Add themed levels of creatures, and quests to clear them out.
Added a quest type to clear out a pit or nest.
Modified the way quest monsters are selected.
Added a new class, brigand, with rogue combat abilities, close to warrior fighting, 
but no spellcasting abilities. (done by Diego Gonzalez)
Add Randarts into standard play
Built item, artifact, and ego-item databases.
Added Player Ghosts.
Add starburst rooms from Sangband. (done by Diego Gonzalez)
Added Ego item lanterns (From EYAngband, coded by done by Diego Gonzalez).
Added various store services that should hopefully help eliminate some 
necessary store scumming and make gold more relevant later in the game.
Added advanced knowledge screens (from EYAngband).
Add poison immunity support in code, and poison immunity to The One Ring.
Quest level generator now factors in player level when determining monster 
depth (so a level 10 character can’t get a quest at 150’ for a level 5 monster)
In the activation for the cloak “Colluin” (res acid, pois, cold, fire, elec), 
and potions of resistance, now activates all temporary resists for the same 
amount of same time.
Autosquelch pseudo-ID now has different settings between weak pseudo-id and strong 
pseudo-id/identified for “good” items.
Added ego-item squelching submenu (Coded by Haran Pilpel and Diego Gonzalez).
Made boots, shields cloaks, helms slightly less common, increased the rarity on the 
corresponding artifacts.  (I made them more common in an earlier version, but I overdid it.)
Made potions of Life and healing slightly less common, increased object level 
where they are “good” items to 85. (same reason)
Added 2 squelch settings, never_pickup and always_pickup that override pickup settings.
Added option when verifying to destroy an item to set item type to squelch.
Added Monster speed counters to control monster speed (slow, fast).
Monsters can get temporarily slowed by gravity and inertia attacks.
Monster shrieks work in line-of-light of monster, not player.
Added support for several new artifact activation types.
Made tunneling a much louder activity.
Changed the way quests reward types is determined, player fame is calculated, 
and quest rewards are decided.
Tried to improve the teleportation spell - make it somewhat more random.
Added support for ego-items to have random immunities, random stat adds, random 
slays, random kills, random low resists and random elemental brands.
Level feelings only shows up after player has been on the level for a while, 
dependent on searching ability.
Known Level feelings are indicated in color of the onscreen “depth” indicator.
Good and regular weapons now also have a chance of boosted damage dice.
Stores gradually have better items as the player increases level.
Spell books, oil, torches, rations of food, ammunition, and certain potions/scrolls 
are never removed from the store inventory, unless the player buys them.
Stores occasionally stock out of the ordinary items.
Higher chance of out-of-depth monsters with autoscummer on.
A little more variety in the size of the small levels.
The cheat_room option no longer gives a message for every small level if the 
always_small_rooms option is on.
Changed quest failure penalty to account the difficulty of the quest.  The easier 
the quest, the more of a reduction in fame.
Made the interface for the auto-roller feature more user-friendly.
You can now use either 'm' or 'p' to cast spells or pray.
Added “toggle_xp” display option so player can se how many experience points they 
have left to gain the next level.
Added “always_show_list” option that can have spell lists, inventory, equipment, and 
floor items automatically display.
The adventurer’s guild displays the monster symbol & color when describing a quest.
Make boots of speed more rare.
Unless you are teleported off a level, there is a chance to fail a guild quest 
when you leave a quest level (to prevent quest level scumming).
Player aggravation causes a monster to use ranged attacks a little more often.
In a vault, when creature and object are created on the same square, the monster 
is now holding the object instead of standing on it.  In addition, the player can’t 
see what the object is until they kill the monster unless they have the cheat_peak 
option on or are in wizard mode.
Added hydra pit/nests, creeping coin pits/nests.
Added more types of hydras, creeping coins.
Added a diamond golem.
Added farmer maggots other dog, Wolf.
Made Liches more dangerous
Added targeting LOS code from ScTHAngband.
Added a new option to disturb whenever monster wakes up (for characters who have 
telepathy and aggravate who don’t want all those messages).
Added Scrolls of Summon Unique, Rod of stone-to-mud, Scroll of *recharging*.
Players can no longer be teleported inside of nests/pits.
Messages for greater vault are not written until the player actually enters the 
vault or leaves the level. (by Diego Gonzalez)
Made Cubragal a heavy crossbow and Umbar crossbow a light crossbow.
Made ego items with random abilities (sustain, resist) occasionally have more 
than one random ability (sustain, resist).

Made some minor AI changes, including:
-	monsters who are teleported away sometimes wandered back and forth trying to 
      find a path to an obsolete target.
-	Monsters can cast recovery spells if they are out of max spell range.
-	Monsters become more aggressive when hit by spells with player out of sight or
      when hack-n-back or pillar dance feature is used.
-	Added another monster flow path.  There is one for creatures who can pass/bash 
      doors, and one for creatures who can’t.
-	Monsters can fire ball spells to squares next to player when player is out of sight.
-	Equipment that aggravates causes monsters to cast spells more often.
Added a new flag of s_hi_unique that onlyl summons high level uniques.  Gave that 
flag to Sauron and Morgoth.
Made the player notes file part of the savefile. (done by Diego Gonzalez)
dded an artifact sling and an artifact robe, and a special artifact gem..
Made some ego items use the new random types (immunity, stat add, slay, etc…)
Made and used some more useful activations for artifacts (temporary resist, identify)
Make cloaks of aman have random immunities.
Removed staff of remove curse and a couple other useless items.
Made 2 spellbooks only available in ironman-only games. (done by Diego Gonzalez)
Made a scroll of create randart, available only in artifact games.
Re-Arranged the monster, ego item, artifact, and object list so things are in some order again.
The game tries harder to put the player in a safe spot when entering a new 
level. (done by Diego Gonzalez)
You can no longer teleport inside a pit/nest. . (done by Diego Gonzalez)
The notes for greater vaults are not written until the player either enters 
the vault, or leaves the level. (done by Diego Gonzalez)



Added most changes from Angband 3.0.5, including:

Changes in Angband 3.0.5:
- Summoned creatures appear near the caster now instead of near the
  player.
- Made rods of detection invulnerable to electric attacks.
- Restored the old behavior of the Glyph of Warding to protect against
  direct melee attacks when standing on it.
- The minor vault "Interlock" had switched height and width definitions,
  causing it to be created in a chaotic state. (Werner Baer)
- Spells that prompt the user for an item (identify, enchantment,
  recharging) or an monster letter (banishment) no longer use mana if
  canceled.
- Removed the “book” system of storing the spell order.
- Give energy to monsters and the player at the end of the game turn
  instead of at the start.  This prevents various odd effects when
  loading a saved game. (reported by Phil)
- Removed the autoroller delay.
- Cleaned up the paragraph handling in the object descriptions.
  (Hallvard B Furuseth)
- "It cannot be harmed by acid and fire" should be "... acid *or* fire".
  (Hallvard B Furuseth)
- Piles of wands, staves, and rods can be used from the ground without
  picking them up first.
- Fixed a problem in the Unix/Linux makefiles.  The POSIX standard
  doesn't allow a dot instead of a colon as separator for the chown
  parameters.
- Removed an accidental use of floating point code that prevented
  Angband from running on old machines without an FPU.
- The "pseudo graphics" used by the (n)curses version didn't support
  terrain lightning correctly.
- The window resize control was sometimes overwritten with a black tile
  in the OS X version.
- Removed the warning message about missing preferences from the OS X
  version.  The first thing a new player sees after starting Angband
  shouldn't be a "scary" message.
- Added project files for building Angband with MS Visual C++ 7.1.
  (Tasha Jessup)




Bugfixes (already fixed)
Not failing a guild quest if a monster teleports the player off the level no 
longer shows the player as not undertaking a quest until the game is re-started.
A couple of the monster names weren't being changed to plural correctly.
Fixed the description for the boots of Avarri.
The descriptions for the Chain Mail of Arvedui and the Dagger 'Angrist were missing.
Fixed the makefile.bcc. (code fix provided by KUSUNOSE Toru)
*Identify*ing a wand/staff wasn’t permanently making changes known.
Fixed a bug where rods, wands, and staffs didn’t always drain properly when a 
monster touched to reduce charges.
Uniques marked for a quest can no longer appear at any other depth but the quest depth.
Monsters were doing cloud surround when on the other side of walls, and it 
was appearing in the wall.
Removed a reference to “talents” in the help files.
Poison brand was missing from Randart Code.
Piles display properly when one of the items in the pile is the same color as 
the squelch “purple dot”.
The note when failing a vault quest was wrong when the player Word of Recalled from the quest level.
Writing a note with a “%” in it could cause a nonsense note to be written.
Monsters, when teleporting-to-player, can no longer appear on glyphs of warding.
When throwing certain potions and killing a creature, it wasn’t noted if the 
monster died, leading to strange and extraneous messages. 
Corrected numerous typos in NPP monster, object descriptions, and option 
descriptions pointed out by Haran Pilpel.
Starburst spells now work (although they are still unused.  They will be used soon)
HTML screen dumps work again.
During character dumps, the “equippy” printout now uses default character symbols, 
and no longer displays custom player symbols or garbage when graphics are used.
Vault quests should have been always on small levels, instead they were always on 
regular size levels.
Cloud surround “darkness” effect now works properly.
Monster’s spell power or spell casting percentage wasn’t being displayed properly.
The random name generator eventually would start all names with an “A” because it 
was adding probabilities to the probability tables every time it generated a new name.
Added command (‘]’) to pickup items from the floor regardless of squelch settings.
The damage for the “bolt of draining” spell now is displayed when the prayerbook is browsed.
Fixed several inconsistencies with the player stealing calculations (code provided by Thomas).


Version 0.3.4

New features:
Start menu accepts lowercase 'q' and 's' at final screen before finishing player birth.
Eliminated the Lua files.
Rogue bonuses from slings are now shown on the character screen. (code provided by James Graves)
Added Ancient dragon pits and young dragon nests.  
Weaker nests/pits no longer appear below certain levels.
Made it a little easier to get potions of augmentation (before stat gain)
	 and dungeon spellbooks as quest rewards.
Made all shields, boots, cloaks, and helms a little more common.
Increased damage for various dragon scale mail activations, and all dragon scale mail now
generate cone/arc shaped breaths instead of fireballs.
A couple new files to help compiling under MAC-OS created by Thomas Castiglione.
Lowered the damage from thrown boulders 25%.
There are no longer cursed non-artifact items in chests.
The player won't fail a guild quest if a monster teleports the player off the level.
The monsters are smarter about not summoning if there is no room to summon monsters.
+ some miscellaneous code cleanup.
Eliminated the "winds" spell attacks (they really didn't add anything to the game).
Added an updated font file by Kurt Tannert.



Incorporated almost all changes from Angband 3.0.4, specifically:

Changes in Angband 3.0.4:
- Chaos resistance protects against confusion by chaos based attacks.
- Smoothed out the tables for extra mana-points per level, hitpoint
  bonus from constitution, "spells per level" vs. "spell stat", and
  INT/WIS dependent failure rate adjustment.  The old steps have been
  replaced by a steady increase, so small stat improvements are more
  useful.  Please note that this will also affect characters imported
  from older versions, so these might gain or lose some spells, mana,
  and hitpoints when imported into Angband 3.0.4 (or NPP 0.4.0).
- Gave the 'thanc daggers a 2d4 damage dice instead of 1d4 and made them
  more common. (Jonathan Ellis)
- Gave each of the Paur* gauntlets a single minor power (slow-digestion,
  regeneration, permanent light, feather fall) and made them more
  common. (Jonathan Ellis)
- Rods of Recall, Perception, Curing, Healing, Restoration, and Speed
  will not be destroyed by electricity.
- Made Raal's Tome of Destruction more, and Kelek's Grimoire of Power
  less common. (Timo Pietilä)
- Removed fire brand from ammo 'of Holy Might'. (Timo Pietilä)
- Give the short range teleport effect from gravity attacks on monsters
  an additional 1 in 3 chance to teleport the monster away.  This should
  make abusing the Rift spell a bit harder.
- Added a level dependent chance to resist the teleportation effect of
  gravity attacks for monsters and the player. (suggested by Jonathan
  Ellis)
- Junk items like broken sticks, empty bottles, and rodent skeletons are
  no longer generated in the dungeon.
- Added support for artifact and ego-item descriptions. (with help from
  Hallvard B Furuseth)
- Added artifact descriptions.  The texts are mainly taken from OAngband
  and other variants. (Jonathan Ellis)
- Added object descriptions assembled by Hallvard B Furuseth.  The
  descriptions are mostly copied from obj-long.spo version 3.0.2 by Hugo
  Kornelis, Stephen S. Lee, Leonard Dickens and Craig Lewis.
- Added ego item descriptions for some ego types. (Hallvard B Furuseth)
- "Easy open" ignores broken doors now when trying to close doors.
- Added new 8x8 tiles and tile definitions provided by "Dawnmist".
- Removed several broken tile definitions for the 32x32 tiles.
- Allow direct melee attacks on visible monsters in walls.  You still
  have to tunnel into the wall if you are trying to attack an invisible
  monster. (suggested by Greg Stark)
- Show infos like "It cannot be harmed by the elements." when
  'Inspecting' books, just as for other item types.
- Changed the behavior of the 'auto_more' option, so that it
  automatically skips '-more-' prompts instead of not displaying
  messages on the top line. (Tom Houser)
- Changed the "Do you really want to quit?" prompt to "Do you really
  want to commit suicide?".
- Added a 'show scores' command to the knowledge menu.
- Changed the wording for the scores display a bit.
- Added the kill count of non-unique monsters to the knowledge menu.
- Added a modified version of Mogami's macro trigger patch. This patch
  modifies how macro trigger keys are displayed on screen and written in
  .prf files.  The trigger keys are no longer displayed in ugly key code
  style, such like ^__FFBE\r or ^_O_FF53\r, but in more smart style,
  such like \[F1] or \[alt-Right].
- Select the sex, race, and class choices from a dead character as
  defaults for a new character.
- Added a stripped down version of Takeshi Mogami's "auto_dump" feature
  from Hengband.  Automatic pref file dumps from the game are now
  marked, so that they can be replaced when dumping to the same
  pref-file again.
- Allow the banishment spell to be aborted at the "Choose a monster race
  to banish" prompt without using up a scroll or charge.
- Added John Rauser's monster list patch that allows the user to display
  a list of the visible monsters in a window.
- Recharging wands or staves that have been fully *identified* before
  will now automatically reveal the new number of charges in the device.
  This fixes a bug where an already *ID'ed* wand or staff couldn't be
  *ID'ed* again after recharging (but plain ID works), despite the
  number of charges being unknown. (bug reported by Eddie Grove)
- text_to_ascii() didn't check that the characters used in \xAB
  sequences represent real hex characters.  Invalid hex sequences are
  now converted to the '?' character. (reported by Kieron Dunbar)
- Improved the handling of incomplete '\x' sequences in macros.  The old
  code could skip the final NUL-byte of the string if it ended with
  '\x', leading to a potential buffer overflow.
- Fixed a typo in the description of the "wild cat". (Jay McAbee)
- Rods and staves of probing are no longer automatically identified when
  used without a monster nearby. (reported by "someog")
- Prevent the player from being hit multiple times by area effect spells
  and breaths that can blink the player (nexus, gravity).
- The player can now get a level feeling when entering level 1 without
  spending 1000 game turns in town first. (Tom Houser)
- Branding ammo or weapons will now automatically try to combine and
  reorder the resulting objects, even if the enchantment of to-hit and
  to-dam fails. (reported by John D. Goulden)
- Try to output minor warning messages (such as "illegal option choice"
  when selecting a non existing item for a command) as soon as possible.
  (reported by "Mogami")
- Show all minor error messages immediately in the message window.
- The effects of light spells are only obvious if you aren't blind.
- Wands and rods of light don't give a message and aren't automatically
  identified when using them while blind. (reported by Steve Kroon)
- Refilling a latern from a stack of laterns will now only use the oil
  from one latern, not from the whole stack. (reported by Jay McAbee)
- Prevent earthquake/destruction spells from working in town.  This
  prevents inappropriate messages (like "The cave ceiling collapses!").
- Automatically try to load the "Kobold.prf" file at startup if the
  player is a Kobold.
- Improved the output of item and monster descriptions in spoilers and
  character dumps.  In some cases punctuation and spaces were wrapped to
  the next line.
- The basic object spoilers only reported the prices for unidentified
  items.  (reported by Hugo Kornelis)
- The cursor keys in the X11 ports behave the same way now, no matter if
  num-lock is on or off.
- Change colors in main-gcu.c. This is Dominik Grzelak's patch to change
  bright white from blue back to bright white. (Ed Cogburn)
- Added a workaround for a bug in the curses version with USE_GETCH.
  The news.txt screen was erased by the first call to the getch()
  function. (Frank Palazzolo)
- Angband consumed 100% of the cpu while waiting for a keypress in the
  GTK port. (Sheldon Simms)
- Allow text to be copied from the game window in the X11 port.
  (modified version of the code in Kieron Dunbar's sCthangband 1.0.10)
- Added transparency support to the 32x32 tiles in the Windows port.
  This requires a modified tiles bitmap and a new transparency mask
  originally created by Andrew Doull:
  ftp://clockwork.dementia.org/angband/Extra/graf-32x32-304.zip
- Removed the hackish 'Show scores' menu entry from the Windows version.
  Use the new knowledge menu entry instead.
- Applied lots of Mac specific patches by "pelpel".
- Allow initialization of the game to continue, even if the
  lib/data/*.raw files can't be written.  In that case the data parsed
  from the lib/edit/*.txt files stays in memory and is used instead of
  the *.raw data.  This currently wastes some memory, since the text
  arrays are not resized to the minimum required length.
- Added a performance tweak for the Angband Borg.
- Increased the data-type of the shopkeeper purse limit from signed
  16 bit to signed 32 bit.  This will allow shopkeepers with a higher
  limit than 32768 gold to be added.
- Added a compile time option to store the savefiles and scores in the
  player's home directory (under ~/.angband/Angband/) on multi-user
  machines.
- Use a different delay function in the DOS version that works around
  the restricted 55ms resolution on Windows 2000 and XP.

Bugfixes:
Bugfix: A player could be in maximize mode with a stat greater than 3, but the stat is 3 due to racial, class deduction.  If the stat is drained, it didn't appear in the color yellow right away.
Bugfix: Some of the irregular shaped vaults were coming out distorted.
Bugfix: The number of attacks being given when inspecting a weapon was wrong sometimes (again).
Bugfix: The show_piles, easy_floor, and mark_squelch_items display options all cooperate now.
Bugfix: Put all the mage spells back in the proper order in the spellbooks, although this means that 
	mages, rogues, and rangers have to re-learn all their spells.

Version 0.3.3
New features:
Rogues may no longer steal using the alter command.
Mana breathers no longer resist mana attacks.


Bugfixes:

Bugfix: Made some changes to make sure "&nothing" isn't produced, and if it is 	produced, doesn't take up a player inventory slot if they walk over it.
Bugfix: The teleport-other spell beams again.
Bugfix: "Lash" ranged attack descriptions are properly capitalized.
Bugfix: Project_arc function now works properly (it was unused before).
Bugfix: The insult attack was givng two messages, and the punctuation was wrong.
	(code fix provided by KUSUNOSE Toru)
Bufix: Gravity breaths could occasionally instakill a player.
Bugfix: Pressing "?" to view help file for birth options didn't take the player directly
	to the actual option.


Version 0.3.2

New features:
In addition to '+' & '-', using 'h' & 'l' can navigate through the character screens.
Pressing ? during chracter race/class selection takes you to information about the specific race/class 
 	in the helpfile.
Evasive Monsters can no longer dodge magical spells and attacks.
Infravision now starts beyond the player's current lite radius.
Double resistance helps protect inventory from damage.
changed rogue dispel monsters trap to Line-of-site damage from an explosion. 
Made Anssi Ramela's first winner of NPP 0.3.x, Brother Steadfast, a temple shopkeeper.
When Rods/Wands/Staffs are drained by monster melee attack, they are usually only partially drained.
Monsters can also heal their mana when draining Rods/Wands/Staffs by monster melee attack

Bugfixes:

Bugfix: Fixed an inconsistency in the quest generation code when making a unique quest (code fix provided by KUSUNOSE Toru)
Bugfix: Fixed a typo in makefile.BCC (code fix provided by KUSUNOSE Toru)
Bugfix: Monsters were getting a free haste spell after they casted orb of draining (code fix provided by KUSUNOSE Toru)
Bugfix: Fix an error in the new project_los_not_player function that allowed monsters
	not in LOS to be affected.
Bugfix: fixed a bug in wizard mode where all rods, staves and wands are listed with the
price of an unidentified rod, stave of wand (patch by Robert Ruehlmann)
Bugfix: Wands of disarming work properly again.
Bugfix: Monster attacks stop after earthquake moves player to a non-adjascent square from monster.
Bugfix: (OS Port only) doing a character dump with note taking option on no longer causes game to lock up.
Bugfix: Pressing ? in the options menu takes you to the specific option in the "options" help file again.
Bugfix: In monster description, "seeker shots" is properly pluralized.
Bugfix: There is proper spacing after describing number of player attacks.
Bugfix: Failed unique quests are now described properly.
Bugfix: When examing a weapon, the number of attacks was occasionally incorrect.
Bugfix:  When accessing the character screen, player speed was being unfairly reduced by 10 if 
they were slowed at the time.  This meant instadeath to anyone with a window open permanently 
displaying the character screen.
Bugfix: Wand and Rod mimics now hide properly.


Version 0.3.1

New features:
Notices of failed quests are written to the notes file.
Potions of life and *healing* can occasionally be good items if the 
	object level is greater than 80.
Made objects in inventory slightly harder to destroy, to compensate
	for all the extra chances they have to get 
	destroyed with the 4gai changes.
Changed the probability of monster description displaying spell frequency.
Re-charging a stack of wands doesn't destroy the whole stack as frequently.
Failing to steal too much only makes newly generated monsters slightly hasted (since
4gai has code to slow down completely hasted monsters).  It also now makes them wary.
(I)nspecting a weapon now also reveals how many attacks per round the 
	character would get with that weapon.
Made potions of augmentation and dungeon spellbooks slightly more
	probable as tailored quest rewards.
Added new icon, made by Kurt Tannert.
Using '~' to view home inventory gives object description as well.


Fixed Bugs:

Bugfix: Sleeping, evasive monsters no longer get a chance to evade a blow.
Bugfix: Shafts can appear above level 5 now.
Bugfix: Boosted damage sides no longer get erased when a savefile is loaded.
Bugfix: Monsters killed by other monsters don't count towards quest tallys.
Bugfix: Monsters no longer fire arrows at player if not a clear path.
Bugfix: Looking at a monster shows messages like ("Asleep", "stunned") again.
Bugfix: A rogue can no longer modify a monster trap if a monster is on it.
Bugfix: Monsters were getting occasional double moves on faster players
Bugfix:	Monster hit points were getting regenerated twice per turn.




Version 0.3.0

New features:

Added Demoband/Sangband 4gai, which includes (as done by Leon Marrick):
- The "basic code":  4GAI monster ranges, spellcasting, learning, 
  mana and spellpower, movement, flow, processing, terrain-handling.
- The "associated code":  Oangband-style noise, monster spells, multi-hued 
  monsters, fewer wimpy monsters, monster polymorphing, compacting, etc.
- EyAngband-style monster lifepoint ratings  (by Eytan Zwieg)
- Sangband-style monster melee attack code and town monsters, 
  various Sangband updates to the above, 
- Some changes to randomizing functions to accomodate the above, more correct rounding
- New and more varied monster attack messages, some from Moria and early Angband
- smaller monster groups and escorts, careful control of nests, pits, and similar
- new limits on summoning level, much fewer monsters summoned
- new limits on OoD monsters, whether randomly generated, summoned, or placed in vaults.
- arc spells and breaths for the monsters.
- Sangband project functions (this means no more hockey-stick corridors)
- Sangband update_view and line-of-sight functions
- many new types of monster resistances
- Evasive Monsters (Sangband, EYAngband)
- monsters surrounded by clouds (UnAngband, Sangband)
- True "Mimics" (Zangband, Sangband)


Note: The breath spells still do Angband-type damage, based on hitpoints rather than spell power.
And have about the same maximums as Angband.  I made some minor changes to some breaths, such as 
gravity, inertia, and time.  Example:  depending on whether the creature breathes powerfully or 
not, gravity breath has different maximum HP damage, and the breath damage-per-hp is also different.
This allows gravity wyrms to do some real damage while slightly reducing the danger from gravity hounds.
Instead of reducing HP and armor class as Sangband/Oangband do, the monsters have a smaller
amount of max_mana, and spell power is adjusted so the damage is similar to that by Angband
Monsters.  They do more damage in some spells than Angband, but I made the sources of healing
a little more common and just a little more powerful to compensate.

Other minor new features:
Player given chance to add last words to notes file upon dying.
Made most sources healing a little more powerful and common.
Made scrolls of mass banishment and banishment more common.
Limited the types of creatures available for quests (no insects, flies, rodents, etc...)
The "make monsters wary" code now works better, as it is based on the project functions.
Got rid of the monster.pkg and associated monster-lua files.  
   The other lua files are still working.
Added monster mana bar to go with the monster hit-point bar.
Changed name of staffs and rods of enlightenment to magic mapping.
Added several new potions and potion flavors.
Added separate commands for stealing (P) and setting traps (O)
aborting the alter trap command no longer takes a turn
slightly revised character screen
removed unused monster options
Made monster spell frequency based on straight percentages rather than the one_in_X scheme
Removed option to occasionally go down another flight of stairs
Added shafts in addition to stairs, which take the player up or down 2 levels.
Made some of the more valuable rods immune to destruction by electricity.
When re-charging, a single rod can no longer be destroyed.
In the knowledge screen, player can now view notes file 
	and home inventory (code provided by Jean-Pierre Hamel)
Made it slightly more likely to sleep, confuse, and slow monsters.
Some potions have affect the monster when thrown (ex. potion of confusion confuses monster)
Two prayer changes in beginners handbook:
1)  Combined find traps and detect doors/stairs into one spell.
2)  Added a weak, low-level attack spell, bolt of draining.



Bugfix: Guild rewards that are chests no longer have traps on them
Bugfix: The guild should no longer give & nothing as a quest reward
Bugfix: Trap doors were being allowed at the bottom of dungeon, quest levels.
Bugfix: Stairs and walls were being treated as walls in wiz_lite.
Bugfix: Cursed artifacts are no longer given as quest rewards.
Bugfix: Deaths of quest uniques were having 2 notes written to the notes file.
Bugfix: Notes written to the notes file now "wrap" to next line with formatting if too long.
Bugfix: Fixed potential buffer overflow problems with note taking.
Bugfix: Upon completing special quests, a note was written to file if take notes option was not on.
Bugfix: Quest chests cannot be autosquelched.
Bugfix: Player no longer gets ammunition as a quest reward
Bugfix: Player now can get shots in a ammunition themed chest.
Bugfix: Monster traps can now kill uniques.
Bugfix: The dungeon stair option was being negated by some changed level generation code.
Bugfix: The "show squelched item as dot" option was overriding the "show piles with special character" option.
Bugfix: The counter that tracked failed thefts was not cleared with a new game.
Bugfix: 3 of the source code files had a capital C as the extension.
Bugfix: Player can now access the help files from the birth menu.
Bugfix: Darkness was causing player to forget stairs.
Bugfix: Quest descriptions now say "destroy" instead of "kill" for undead and 
	other non-living monsters.



Version 0.2.2

New features:

Added an option to retain squelch settings on new character.
Made it an option for a to-be-squelched item to appear as a purple dot.
Made the chests lighter
Changed the message when monsters see a playet trap or theft.
Changed the messages that describe the special quests.
Updated all makefiles to include the proper files.


Bugfix:  ability to modify traps based on rogue_combat flag, should have
	 been set_traps flag.
Bugfix:  The option smart_packs was not showing up in the character dump option.
Bugfix:  Calling the change player name command erased the old name.
Bugfix:  The home equipment display mode was displaying if the home was empty.
Bugfix:  Quest reward generation code was using last space in home to store generated objects.
Bugfix:  Tailored Quest rewards needed further fixing.
Bugfix:  Chests were occasionally having sustains, abilities, and high
	 resists attached to them.
Bugfix:  Reading a make monster trap scroll locked up if not pointed to an
	 empty floor space.
Bugfix:  Trap/Door destruction wasn't destroying doors, just unlocking them.
Bugfix:  The quest reward code was causing to much gold to be produced.
Bugfix:  re-set # of items generated in quest reward code.
Bugfix:  Ammunition was being given out as quest reward.
Bugfix:  Level generation was wrong when in bigtile mode.
Bugfix:  Damage calculations from thrown weapons was wrong (Tony Holmes fixed this).
Bugfix:  Player Dump was list cheat options instead of score options.
Bugfix:  Adult_force_small_lev was pointing to wrong option


plus some misc. code cleanup.....


Version 0.2.1

New feature:

Quest rewards are now handed directly to the player, rather than
      dropped on the floor outside the Guild.

Fixed Bugs:

Bugfix:  The startup screen referred to a help file that no longer existed.
Bugfix:  Separated recall depth from max depth.  This was messing
         up the quest generation code.
Bugfix:  Fixed the quest reward code, which had numerous bugs.
Bugfix:  Updated tiles to reflect the monsters and items I added.
	(Although all the tilesets are still incomplete from V 3.0.3).
Bugfix:  The game would crash when a charging rod was dropped in the home.
Bugfix:  The name of a monster wasn't properly capitalized when they
         set off a trap.	
Bugfix:  Corrected the number of monsters generated on a small level.
Bugfix:  One of the birth options wasn't formatted correctly on-screen.
Bugfix:  Fixed the spacing when generating the player history.
Bugfix:  Unique quests correctly display in notes patch upon completion.
Bugfix:  Special quests now are written to notes file upon completion.
Bugfix:	 When a monster destroyed a trap, the square was staying lit.


Version 0.2.0 

New features:

Added EYAngband-style quests.
Added EYAngband small levels and option to always have small levels
All classes get better chance to hit sleeping monster

Rogues get new abilities (from Oangband):
extra shot with sling at level 26
unusually gifted with slings, better to-hit and to-dam
get additional to-hit and to-dam when throwing well-balanced weapons
unusually higher chance to hit sleeping monster
ability to set traps, set advanced monster traps, and steal items
from monsters. (one trap to begin, and second trap at level 26)
/*warning, failing to steal has some very negative consequences*/

Made the JLE ego items and amulets a little weaker.
Added Leon Marrick's modified help files and re-edited them for NPPAngband.
Added throwing weapons and well balanced weapons.  They are easier to hit with & 
they do extra damage.
Players start with equipment wielded.
Took interactive startup menus from EYAngband.
Added minimum depth for monsters during creation.  Weaker monsters don't appear 
deeper.
Added a new trap (dagger pit).
Players don't use full energy if they use less than max# of attacks
to kill a monster.
Modified the file dump to include a chart of resist flags, stat increases and 
sustains due to equipment.
Added additional player screens which show chart of resist flags, stat
Increases and sustains due to home inventory.
Changed "A" monsters from Angels to "Ainur", and modified a couple other 
monsters.
Adjusted speeds of some monsters to +5, +15, or +25.
Made probing more informative.
Added "Create Monster Trap" scroll.
Rangers only get one extra shot with bow, at level 26.
Warriors get an extra attack at level 26(but a max of 5 from the weapon, for a 
total of 6).
Made "young_dragon" nests more common, humaniod nests deeper, & animal pits 
rarer.
Some nests will occasionally use the highest level monsters
rather than every other monster out of 16 chosen. 
Some pits will occasionally use only the harder half of the 64 chosen monsters. 
Chance of avoiding theft not 100% until dex is 18/180.
Rods may be recharged, with a chance of destroying them.
Messages for temporary resists now factor in the appropriate permanant resist
(ex. a player who is immune to cold will not get message "you feel more
 resistant to cold" when they quaff a potion of resist cold)
Altered parsing routine to allow for uber-flags (ex. resist_all), from 
SCthAngband.
Added some uber-flags (ex...im_elem, no_charm, drop_up_to_14 items)
Staffs now stack like the wands/rods.
The stun counter stops increasing when a player is knocked out, so players 
have a much better chance of avoiding the "knocked out" instadeath.
Adjusted the way chest themes are derived, and made larger chests
have more great items than smaller chests.
Smaller chests are now more common.
Large jeweled chests replace ruined chests, and have more items.
Many Greater Vaults how have chests in them.
Chests with potions, scrolls, rods/wands/staffs now more common.
Tweaked the items that can be in a chest.
Players are now much more likely to enter a dungeon next in a corner or hallway
rather than a room.
Removed debug information from executable file. Executable file is now
three times smaller, and much quicker.
Changed all references of "Multi-Hued" to "Chromatic"
Added random name generator as option for character during birth.
Randarts are less likely to aggravate.
Made the first winner's (Matthias Kurzke) character, (Tim, a hobbit rogue) into 
a black market shopkeeper.

bugfixes:
fixed: several typos in the options menu
fixed: partially destroying stacks of wands, rods, and staffs now shows the 
proper amount
	of charges by which the stack is being reduced.
fixed: notes patch could be turned on & off in mid-game, should be birth option
fixed: buffer problems in writing messages to a file with the birth_take_notes 
option
fixed: Special note wasn't written to notes file when a player was dead, or when 
Morgoth killed
fixed: The HTML screenshot meta tag indicated an Angband 3.0.3 screen dump. HTML 
file now indicates an NPPAngband screen dump.
fixed: The name of greater vaults wasn't showing up right in the notes file.



Version 0.1.1 (all bugfixes)

fixed: names of killed uniques didn't appear in notes file if player was blind, 
unique was invisible 
	or out of LOS when killed
fixed: player notes didn't properly indicate player depth
fixed: artifacts made it to the notes patch multiple times, and
 after the first time the depth is indicated as "255"
fixed: when using tiles, the player was shown as a blank square
fixed: the notes file identified a greater vault redundantly
fixed: the player options were not properly aligned
fixed: the lite radius around creatures didn't always update correctly


Version 0.1.0 

*	Added support for describing monsters speed at +5 (somewhat quickly), +15 
(exceedingly quickly), and +25 (extremely quickly). 
*	Added patch to change player's color as their hit-points drop. This is an 
option 
found under "display options". 
*	Increased chance of increased damage dice and to hit dice on weapons, and 
increased changes in increased damage dice on ammunition. 
*	Decreased level boost from dragon scale mail to +10. 
*	Reduced level boost from powerful amulets to +10. 
*	Amulets & spell books are generated as a guaranteed "good" only if out of 
depth. 
*	Added option to go up or down additional flight of stairs some of the time 
(from 
Oangband). 
*	Added "themed chests", similar to Oangband. There are 16 themes, and may 
frequently contain guaranteed good or great objects. 
*	Chests now increase level rating by +5. 
*	Added different templates for "great items" rather than good items. There 
are 
several things in the good list aren't in the great list (such as spellbooks).   
*	Changed the object generation code so that the "great" flag no longer 
needs the 
"good" flag to produce a great item. The "great" flag without the "good" flag 
will 
produce a great item, but it only gets one chance instead of four to become an 
artifact. This was done as a way to keep the new style chests from becoming too 
powerful. 
*	Added Dr. Whites Monster Lite patch. 
*	Added Eytan Zwieg's vault flipping patch. 
*	Added a note taking patch, this is a birth option (birth_take_notes), and 
needs to be 
specified before the character is started. I did a significant re-write of this 
patch. 
Comments can be written to a file, and they will automatically print out in a 
character dump. In addition, it automatically records the turn, level of char, 
and 
dungeon level of certain events, such as: the killing of uniques, finding of 
artifacts, 
and greater vaults created, when a player is killed or wins the game, and every 
time 
the character gains a new level, but only if it is divisible by 5 (level 5, 10, 
15, 20, 
etc...). These notes automatically print out with the character dump. The 
formatting 
on this feature isn't perfect yet, but I plan on finishing it after I 
incorporate 
EYAngband's resistance system. 
*	Added rod-wand-stacking based on Oangband 0.6.0. 
*	Reduced delay when using the autoroller to create a character. Should be 
10 times 
faster. 
*	Added DarkGod's html screen dump patch. 
*	Dropped Items may now be specified by theme. Code is mostly in place to 
create 
themed monster drops. Currently, the themed drops are used in chest opening & 
vault creation (chests w/ monster 40 levels OOD).  
*	Added the autosquelch patch. I made some minor changes to the sub-quality 
squelching menu. For rings and amulets, there are only three levels (none, 
cursed, 
and all but artifact). I also added in the option to automatically squelch 
chests after 
they are opened.
 
*	I deliberately made almost no changes to the edit files, so the first 
version will give 
almost the the exact same playability as Angband v 3.0.3. with some nice options 
that Angband, IMHO, should contain, such as rod/wand stacking, screen dumps 
and autosquelch. The only changes in the edit files are:
*  Added rods re-charge time to the PVAL flag (without this updated file, the 
game WILL crash almost instantly due to divide by zero errors) 
*  Increased the rarity of chests, to compensate for them being loaded with 
so many good & great items 
*  Added the has_lite flag to the appropriate creatures, so the Lite Patch will 
work 
*  Removed the good flag from many of the creatures who have the great 
flag, to balance out all the great items that are now in the chests. Mostly only 
those who got the great flag added in the JLE-patch. 
*  Modified some of the greater vaults so they include chests in certain areas. 
*  Five new types of monster vaults and pits. The ogre pits are a little bland 
right now. I plan on adding more types of Ogres, but I am deliberately 
holding that until the next version of NPP Angband so this one keeps as 
close as possible to 100% Angband 3.0.3 playability. 

*  Six new types of monster vaults and pits. The ogre pits are a little bland 
right 
now. I plan on adding more types of Ogres, but I am deliberately holding that 
until 
the next version of NPP Angband so this one keeps as close as possible to 100% 
Angband 3.0.3 playability. 
*  There is a minimum depth enforcer when selecting the type of Monster Pit or 
Next, so the weaker ones, such as Jelly Pits, don't appear at higher depths. 
.
