Quest_Angband 0.9.0

This variant of angband (based on 2.8.1) features at the
moment 20 quests.
These quests are :
        level 99        Sauron
        level 100       Morgoth
The other 18 quests are randomly chosen at the birth of
a new character.

When you enter a quest level you will get a message saying
how many and which monster you will have to kill.

The new command CTRL-Q will show the status of the current
quest.

When you finish a quest (kill the last monster) a staircase
down will be placed and you will get at least one great item.

Because this is only a test version it is possible to make a
dump of the quests with the char dump. (Shift-C, f)

The savefile isn't compatible with 2.8.1 because in 2.8.1
the monster index of a quest was saved as a 8-bit int but I
needed an 16-bit (more then 256 monsters). If you change
load2.c you can load your old files but you won't have any
quests (maybe not even Morgoth and Sauron, I'm not sure). I'll
try and look in to this for a future version.

If anyone has some ideas on this (or something else) or bugs
please let me know.


I've made the changes on a Win95 PC with Borland C++ 4.5, so
this should work without any changes, for other platforms
there shouldn't be a problem either because nothing
system specific is changed (I think :-). Except the makefiles,
I've added quest.c and this isn't changed in all the makefiles. 

All the changes I've made, should be marked with my full name.


Quest_Angband 0.9.5

Changes made:

Genocide and Mass genocide will (should) no longer kill
quest monsters.

The quest should be more spread (no five quests in a row).

There is a chance all the quest monsters are placed in
one special room (see v_info.txt).
If you want more different rooms, feel free to send them
to me.

The makefile.ibm is changed to compile with gcc
(Thanks to Gregory Velichan for sending me this file)

Quest_Angband 0.9.8

Changes Made:

Solved the bug where a unique quest monsters could
search infinitly for a quest room.

The header of the dump file is changed.

The number of monsters to kill is a bit more random.
The lower the quest the more monsters you'll get.

It is possible that there are more than one special
quest room.

I've added some more quest rooms.

Because I'm leaving on vacation, I didn't have much
time to test it. 

This is probably the last beta, so in the next version
I will probably remove the option to dump the quests.


Other news:

Quest Angband Homepage : http://www.softjoys.ru/~qa
thanks to Max Maximov (mcsi@softjoys.ru)


Quest_Angband 1.0.0

I've finally found the time to work on Quest Angband.
This is the first official version (without any
bugs I hope). I'm playing it myself so it will
probably take a while before any new version will be
released (unles there are some serious bugs, our
someone gives me a great idea, ...).

Changes Made:

A quest monster was able to multiply, that should be fixed.

The quest should be a little bit easier (less monsters and
less out of depth)

I've added a scroll *Word of Recall* which will send you to
the next Quest level when read in town, or bring you to town
when read in the dungeon. It takes a little more time than
the standard WoR scroll.

In the town, drunks will insult you (I liked the idea when
I read it on the newsgroup, thanks for the sender)

The mages spells are more powerfull. The level of a mage is
doubled for the damage calculation (only the mage not
the ranger or rogue). But to compensate, a mage will be
encumbered by armor much sooner.

With the help of a friend, it is now possible to choose
how many extra quests you want (between 0 and 40). You can
still compile the game so that it will take the standard
20 quests without asking. (Thanks to Jimmy De Leat)

There was a Quest Room without doors (sorry).

By the way, you can still dump the quests (character dump). This
will probably be turned to a wizard option in the next version.


Quest Angband 2.8.2

Changes:

- As you can see from the version, I've upgraded to 2.8.2
- The mages spells have become even more powerfull (for the
  mage only).
- Mage can have a maximum of 2 attacks/round (was 4)
- GoI changed: protects to a maximum damage of 200hp,
  when hit with more than 200hp the duration will
  be decreased, automatic resistant to acid, fire, cold,
  poison and electicity.
- The mages armor may weight only up to 15lbs
- The mages weapon may weight only up to 10lbs
- mana penalty for exceeding weight is more severe for all
  classes.
      for armor:  4lbs to much    -4 mana
                  9lbs to much   -18 mana
                 14lbs to much   -42 mana
                     ...           ...
- replaced Heroism and Berserker (in Tenser's Transformation)
  with Collapse Ceiling and Elemental Bolt.


Quest Angband 2.8.2b

Changes:
- Fixed bug:spells "Elemental Blast" crashed the game
- Added Random Artifacts (from Greg Wooledge)
- Added expanded k_info.txt (from Leigh Silas Hanrihan)
- Added a new EGO-item (Magical infused blade)
- Upgraded Amulet of the Magi (Int bonus)
- Added Ring of Mana (Increases your maximum mana)


Heino Vander Sanden

Heino.VanderSanden@AdValvas.Be
