
   RandomBand Generic Info File.

      RandomBand will have random monsters generated each new game,
   but  that will take a while to implement properly.  If you have any
   ideas, look in the lib\edit directory for the randbase, randtype
   and r_unique files to see some of what will be used.  I am always
   looking for new ideas to use for random monster generation.

   Yahoo group...

   http://groups.yahoo.com/group/RandomBand/

   (To be updated whenever I change something I hope!)

   First note...
      I haven't added or changed any documentation, therefore, I am
      including this text file with some basic change info.

      Once I get done with the vast majority of changes I will look
      into properly updating the documentation.

   ---

   March 22, 2005

   RandomBand 0.4.1

      Bunch of fixes.
      Still a lot of weirdness, but needs testers.

   ---

   January 2, 2004

   RandomBand 0.4.0

      Player magic now working again.


   ---

   May 20, 2003

   RandomBand 0.3.3

      New ego system is mostly working.
      Actmagic system is now working.
      Both of these should be complete in the next version.
         You will still need to rename the files new_?_info.txt
         to their proper ?_info.txt.  These won't be done till I
         am done making egos.

   ---

   April 4, 2003

   Forgot to update the number.

      Got CVS working so I now have the following.
      No player magic right now.
      New ego system with over 300 ego types.
      Reduced number of object kinds, many became egos.

   RandomBand 0.3.1

   March 27,  2003

      Fixed Artifact System
      Modified to-damage bonus to work better with the current combat.

   ---

   RandomBand 0.3.0

   March 13,  2003

      Some work done, a lot more to go.

   Some of the big changes...

      Randarts - No set artifact list, everyone will be a randart.

      Glowstones - perma light (shifting radius) and activate for one
      of numerous ball spells.  These were added to make sure that
      some randart lights were generated.

      Chi Warrior / Chi Magic - More of an experiment trying to figure
      out what was needed to get new magic, and classes working.  They
      are pretty decent fighters and have some very powerful magic,
      but usually have to rely on fortification in the early game to
      survive.

      Dungeons - Maximum size has been increased, but normal level
      start small at the top and get bigger as you go down.

      Item Durabilty - Still working on this but most is implemented.
      Basically everything has a value from (J) Junk to (M) Mint.
      This is pretty much and index of the hit points of the object.
      Each object has a different value, and you will see
      deterioration.  Artifacts wear out just like normal equipment,
      but it takes a lot longer.  Also, anything with a normal AC
      value or a +AC value can absorb attack damage.  This usually
      won't stop all of the attack unless you have some really
      powerfully enchanted items, but it can reduce damage easily.
      The reduction in damage goes against the durability of the item
      deteriorating it faster.  Digging with a non-digging item can
      quickly erode the quality of the weapon and end up
      disintegrating it if used too much.  (Note : No way to repair
      anything exists yet, there will be in future versions.)

      Combat - Combat was switched to

         (# Dice D Dice Sides) + (To D bonuses)

      Deadliness now play a more important role of determining chance
      of critical hits.

      Mage Sensing - Works like Warriors normal pseudo sensing but
      works on potions, wands, staves, scroll, rings and amulets.





