Revision history of Team Angband:

Date	Version	Comments

1?/8/99	  0.5.1 Some bug-fixes.

10/8/99	  0.5.0 Some "team" functions have been implemented.  ^Nap allows
		you to deactivate the team while focusing on one player.
		^Leader tells all other team members to follow the current
		player like mindless drones, or mindlessly attack the
		presently (*)targeted monster.  ^Tagalong kicks team
		members which have dropped out of follow-mode back into
		follow-mode.

10/7/99	  0.4.0 Save files implemented, minor display changes.

10/5/99	  0.3.0 First playable version!  
		Players: view code, while still buggy, now allows the
		four characters to move about the dungeon and see at
		least what they should.
		Monsters: monsters now go after the nearest character,
		and attacks upon him damage him and not the first player.

9/22/99	  0.2.0 The characters can now enter the dungeon.  They all
		are placed into the same start room.  Also, they can
		all do things!  (The inventory, walking, fighting, etc. 
		code seems not to need further modification.) However, the
		refresh code is buggy as hell; they see what is in one of
		the *other* character's field of vision.

9/19/99	  0.1.0	The data structures and code are modified so that 4
		characters can exit simultaneously.  Four characters
		are created at start.  However, only the first 'leader'
		character appears, and only he can actually do anything.
dard angband savefile.

When you start without a savefile, you'll be prompted to make
4 characters.  You can either make them by hand the old fashioned way,
or you can choose "quick-start" which will roll up four random
characters for you.  I recommend the quick start, simply for the
challenge of playing with Half-troll mages and Gnome Warriors :)

Now you're in the game.  You'll notice that your control cycles from
player to player.  When this gets annoying, try out the team functions.
^N will put all other characters to sleep, letting you focus on the
current character.  ^L will tell all other characters to follow you
(as described above), and ^T will help reign in those that get lost.
To turn off these functions, ^D should work well.  Oh, ^L acts as a
toggle; when your leader character is done leading, have him ^L to
stop leading.

Now go down into the dungeon, and have some fun ganging up on poor
helpless monsters.  Beware, though; the death of any one character
will terminate the game and mangle your savefile beyond repair.  (Don't
worry; *real* versions of Tangband won't do this to you :)  Note that the
monsters are somewhat smart: they will go after the character nearest
them, rather than doing something stupid like always chasing character #1.
However, flow_by_smell is disabled, so don't expect any brilliance from
the monsters... at least, not yet ;->

Anyway, give it a whirl, see what sorts of bugs you can find, and let
me know what you think.  You can email me at u1006057@warwick.net ;
krpeters@warwick.net might work too :)

Oh, right, I wanted to let you all know what the future for Tangband
holds:

1) An adventurer's guild, where new characters can be hired to replace
	dead or retired (sucky) characters
2) 'L'eader and 'N'ap functions, which massively improve the team handling
	interface:  In 'L'eader mode, the other characters will turn into
	docile pets that can be lead around easily until danger arrives;
	in 'N'ap mode, the other characters will go to sleep while the
	focus character takes care of some business.
3) Improved monster intelligence, capable of hunting out weaker players,
	teaming up to avoid getting slaughtered, and other nastiness
4) Improved mage and priest spellcasting, allowing spellcasters to cast
	defensive and other helpful magics upon the other team members:
	Yes, that means Warriors walking around with Globe of
	Invulnerability ;->
5) Difficulty levels:  Obviously, having four characters instead of one
	makes the game a lot easier.  Future versions will allow you
	to choose how to counter this imbalance, such as through greatly
	increasing the number of monsters per level, increasing their HP's
	and other stats, or decreasing the depth which nasty buggers
	appear.
6) Active and inactive characters:  Why limit yourself to four characters?
	Instead, you'll be able to have 24 or so stashed away in an inn,
	which you can pick and choose among to outfit any particular
	exploration into the dungeon.  I may even implement a method
	to allow players to email their teammembers to one another,
	allowing you to give or trade characters to/with one another.
7) Increased class differentiation:  Since mages will no longer have to
	march into hand-to-hand combat, there's no reason to give them
	nastier magic attacks, while simultaneously crippling their
	physical combat abilities even further...

And that's just the ideas I've come up with so far :)

	Karl
		<marX>
