
	Main Feature of Team Angband:
* More bugs then in any other variant. If I'm wrong, tell me, so I
can add some more. ;-)

	Send your comments, thoughts, critics, bugs, patches ;) and
	ideas to Aerton@chat.ru. You can also try find me on othernet
	#angband IRC channel under nick "Aerton"
								Ilya Bely


		Notes about future versions:
	Fix redraw and distribution.
	Mostly, I will follow what Karl Peters had wrote (read team-old.txt),
but not at a whole.
	Team of variable size 1-6. Possibility to leave some team members
at home in town.
	Something must be done with teleportation. It is no fut at all
and a lot of headache when team is spread across the dungeon. The only
troubleless teleportation is Phase Door. May be, when teleportation
spell is cast, caster will teleport with adjancent characters (he grabs
them by their shoulders before disappearing). Or, may be, some kind
of dimension doors is created between the place of caster and teleport
destination. Like "between" in PernAngband, but last only a short period
of time. Or all teleoprts performed at a same period of time lead to
nearby location. Main problem arises with monsters teleporting players
away. I have no clear idea yet on this subject....
	Similar problems arise with changing dungeon level...
	Magic system will be changed. Many spells will be possible to
cast on another characters. E.g. Orb of Blessing. Some spell will
gone (Satisfy Hunger, Alter Reality), but most will stay in some form.
Spells will be separated between spells and prayers (healing spells will
be for priests and paladins only). High-damage mage's spell will require
much more time to cast. Other party members needs to protect mage, while
he is casting such spells. Spells, that affect other players will cost
more SP, will be of higher level and, in general, less effective, than
thier versions that affects caster only.
	Something to be done with XP mechanism. Giving all XP to the
one, who made fatal blow isn't right. Giving XP for some HP isn't
tight too. Not only player can hit/heal monster, but, worse, low-level
character will be able to thow something at sleeping deep monster and
teleport away, having many XP for a vety little risk. The most right
way is to store for each creature how many damage does to him every
player, still it will need a lots of memory. And another situation,
warrior is fighting in a narrow corridor with some nasty monster, while
mage casts haste him and confuses monster and priest heals and is casting
resistances on him. It will not be right to award only warrior with
XP. So, currently, whole team gains a full XP for each monster they
kills, no matter who did this. XP for opening doors and casting is given
to appopriate character only. Full XP (it is not divided by team size),
is given because TAngband requires more time to play then any other
variant, due to its nature. And so will it be untill i'll have better
solution. So far i can see no one.
	I also have several other ideas on dungeon generation, monster
spells and AI, team management, but they will wait until bugs will be
fixed, and interface becomes not so hostile.
	I used sometimes // - style comments, their ugliness is a sign
"this code *needs* to be changed" for temporary hacks. If your compiler
complain on these, simply remove these lines, there are really not many.
I belive to remove of them in nearest future...

Warning:
Saves will become unreadable once more. I'll add new info there,
clean data structuers and change format of savefiles. I will not
care about old saves while it is a development version.

	Brief history of changes maden by me, see older changes
	and plans in tang-old.txt
	
Date	Version	Comments

 2jul00  0.6.0  Added new command 'h' to stay for 1/4 time of normal
            	stay command, no pickup is possible. Usefull when
		team get stuck. Jumping (command '-') now disables
		autopickuping of any items, even if they are inscribed
		as {=g}

23jun00		Implemented artifact_diggers, redraw_recall_windows
		patches for 2.9.0

22jun00		Fixed(?) one of three most annoying bugs - processing
		wrong character's info in combat (wrong messages,
		inventory destructions).

13jun00		Applied easy_floor, gcc_optimizer, poisonous_food patches
		for Angband 2.9.0 code.

28may00		Removed load1.c - it have no sense here. "You" replaced
		by character's name in many messages. 0.5.1 saves
		now unreadable. Team routines moved from cmd?.c to team.c
		
27may00		2.8.3 code replaced by 2.9.0 - so have all new features!
		I *love* diff and patch utilites! Players now can drop
		gold by	'$' command. New option to synchronize all team
		members' options. Info files replaced by Jonathan Ellis's
		"290edits". XP sharing.
