Unangband now uses an online database to record bugs and feature
requests. See http://developer.berlios.de/bugs/?group_id=331 for
an up to date list.

The following comprises a rough ideas list not already included
at that URL.



This file describes my basic to do list for Unangband.
Also see Lib\Todo, which is a dumping group for
various files and ideas.

And new features:
- Implement Ego lights, and monster bleeding/poisoning from
Eyangband.
	This is primarily so that you can cut a monster and watch
it bleed everywhere. Which is currently done as a hack. I was
also thinking about doing magical candles, and haven't decided
whether lanterns will be done in e_info.txt or k_info.txt.

- Implement monster invisibility spells.
Some monsters can make themselves invisible temporarily... should
also make see invisible items deeper in the dungeon, simply because
it is less important...

- Implement the player hiding in terrain, and items of
invisibility.
	This will require tweaking the monster AI so that
monsters that cannot see you do something. Acting confused is
in my opinion, a bit of a hack. I'd rather they left the room,
or wandered around the room, if they weren't aware of you. Acting
confused if they are aware of you might be a possibility.

- Give monsters some AI patterns. eg

Hunt - move to a random room exit, or move down corridor.
Make decision again when encountering another room exit.
Attack anyone from another room. Get the bodies and bring
back to home room.

Patrol - as hunt, but never leave room. Attack anyone from
another room. Return to room if outside it.

Twitch - move randomly (Don't use unless none other possible).

Gather - Use hunt algorithm to go to another room. If room has
items, get items and return to home room and drop them in home
room. Flee anyone from another room if has items, or attack
them otherwise. (requires take item ability).

Scout - move to a random room exit, or move down corridor.
Attack anyone from another room, and set immediately to flee.
Return to home room. (requires ranged attack)

Animals only use patrol and hunt algorithms (Hunting when hungry,
patrol when satiated).

Rest - never leave room. Remains stationary until detects target.
Return to room if outside it.


- Implement friendly monsters and uniques.
	Long overdue, but its a reasonably big job.

- Implement monster spells the same way as player spells.
	Ditto.

- Implement alchemy/manufacturing items.
	This is low priority at this stage. Perhaps do essences
as per Sangband, or ingredients based system?

- Implement room descriptions version 2.
        This will mean that features and objects will be placed
more aesthetically around the room, and match the textual
descriptions.

- Implement revised bard spell list.
Revise bard spells, so that none are directional spells.
(Eg fiery aura etc.)

- Implement line of sight damage intensification spells.
eg Fire Dance, Wild Waters, Sea's Rage and so on.
These spells affect terrain with the same flavour attack and
result in an extra dynamic action.  Eg Fire Dance causes
all locations in line of sight that cause FIRE damage to burn
again immediately.

- Implement all magic spells so that they are level dependent.

- Implement mana regeneration, searching, detection etc. as a spell effect.

- Implement monster spellbooks, so that monsters can cast all ACID_MAGIC
etc. spells.

- Implement 4GAI for monsters.

- Implement skill system. Unangband skill system comes out of the
specialistaion system: Similar to Sangband, but with restrictions on what
you can spend skills on based on your surroundings. eg you can only learn
weapon & shield skill when you are holding or carrying a shield.
Also add Damage Resistance skill, so that you increase you hps
independently of total skills.

Instead of Oaths, have totals for certain skill combinations limited to
a certain value eg highest magic skill + highest weapon skill may not exceed 150,
Fire Magic + Water Magic may not exceed 150 etc.

Allow spell skills to be learnt based on what spells are known and books
are held. eg to learn any spell in Cantrips requires the player have a
Cantrips book.

Other skills: Literacy (Use of scrolls), Wizardy (Use of staffs), Chemistry
(Use of potions) etc.

- Allow research of spells without a spellbook. You can continue to research
a spell once you have learnt it. This gives you a chance of producing
Research Notes (for spells), Runesticks (For runes), Lyric Sheets (For songs)
or Prayer Beads (for prayers). The item contains a spell from another spell
book that the spell you are researching is contained in. eg researching
Detect Monsters in a magic book of Cantrips may help you produce research
notes for Identify.

TODO: Make mushrooms and other mimic monsters 'hide' in objects that they
mimic.

TODO: Add tents (G:<:R), sails (G:>:R).

TODO: Replace wooden floors with wooden decks.

TODO: Allow player to dig shallow pits, which fill with water etc to become
shallow water.

TODO: Let pits and deep pits fill with water to become deep water etc.

TODO: As previous points, but let water flow into a chasm to become a
waterfall, similiarly lava etc.

The above three should probably use LAVA, ACID etc transitions, rather
than HURT_FIRE, HURT_ACID.

TODO: Should be able to traverse chasms/pits once fallen in without damage
(Actually all MUST_CLIMB terrain).

TODO: Have the monster TRAPS spell have a chance of triggering any adjacent
traps after creating traps, to affect the target. This is based on monster
level, but we need to be careful to pick such activated traps at a reduced
difficulty (eg 2/3 level) as traps can be dangerous. This also applies for
chests.

TODO: Add phases of the moon. During a full moon, light all outside
locations (but not adjacent locations - so still darker than daylight).
During a new moon, treat outside like inside.  Should treat one phase
darker if the night is overcast, and two phases darker if it is
stormy (2 phases darker during daytime treats like a full moon).

TODO: Add before sunrise and after sunset phases of night. During
before sunrise, do not light locations to the west. During
after sunset, do not light locations to the east. These time last
for half an hour.

TODO: Add an eclipse, which lasts 5 minutes and occurs once... light
like a full moon.

