==== Differences from Vanilla ====

Contents:

1.	New Commands
2.	Changed Commands
3.	Attacking and Shooting
4.	TO BE CONTINUED LATER

==== New Commands ====

The following commands are new to Unnamed Angband:

Apply rune (y) or Engrave rune (^E)
	Apply a rune from a runestone to an object. Applying runes to
	objects can have various effects, from transforming an object to a 
	type more closely associated with that rune, to enchanting the object
	with a magical effect or even an ego power. More runes applied to an
	object will have additional, and often cumulative effects, up to 4 or 5
	runes on most objects. Current applying a rune to another rune acts like
	other objects: in a future version this will cause a magical effect.
	If an object cannot have a rune applied to it, it is likely to be an
	artifact or powerful ego item of some kind. Note that not all runes
	have a beneficial effect, but more than one rune is usually an increase
	in power.

Interact with auto-inscriptions ($)
	Auto-inscriptions are inscriptions that are automatically created
	when an item is created or identified. Currently you can set
	auto-descriptions for all items of a particular type (tval), kind
	or ego item type. In a future version, this will be expanded to
	match the auto-squeltch functions of other variants.

==== Changed Commands ====

The following commands act differently from Vanilla Angband:

--- Inventory Commands ---

Equipment list (e)
	There is an additional BELT slot which can have any item wielded
	into it. Items in your belt slot do not apply any special powers
	or effects to the character but these items can be wielded/fired
	and otherwise used in half the normal time. In addition, any
	item may be wielded into your WIELD slot for the same benefits,
	but you will only attack with weapons, and can only kick to attack
	if you are holding other items.

Wear/Wield equipment (w)
	You can wield any equipped item to move it to your belt slot. If
	you can wield the belt slot item back in the equipment slot it will
	be swapped, otherwise the existing belt slot item will be dropped.
	As describe above, any item can be wielded to halve the time it
	takes to use the item. Wielding items from the floor takes half
	the energy that Angband requires.

Destroy an item (k) or Destroy an item (^D)
	Destroying an item now prompts you to ask if you will destroy all
	instances of that item. If you answer yes, item of that kind will
	be inscribed with =k=g when identified, which is an inscription
	that prompts you to destroy the item when you walk over it (=g for
	auto-get, =k for destroy item instead of getting it). If the item
	is an ego-item, all objects of that ego-type will be auto-inscribed
	instead.

--- Movement Commands ---

Walk (with pickup) (;)
Walk (flip pickup) (-)
	If you walk into a hidden monster, you will push over it, as opposed
	to attacking it, as you would an invisible monster. Walking also
	takes half the energy of vanilla Angband, unless you are moving in
	Search mode. This is balanced by forcing you to Rest to recover from
	being tired every so often. This is affected by your Constitution:
	a higher Constitution allows you to have to rest less frequently.

Go up staircase or travel (<)
	In campaign mode, use the < key to travel to an adjacent location.
	This uses some food and adds to the time, and requires that you
	are Full and near the edge of the wilderness map and on the surface.
	Currently, you can travel if you are poisoned, bleeding or stunned,
	you will be required to recover from these in a future version before
	allowing this.

Go down staircase or well (>)
	You may climb down wells in the dungeon in addition to staircases.

--- Resting Commands ---

Stay still (with pickup) (,) or Stay still (with pickup) (.)
Stay still (flip pickup) (g)
	These commands all take half the time of vanilla Angband.


--- Searching Commands ---

Search (s)
	Searching can spot if water is deep, and identify many other hidden
	terrain features.

--- Alter Commands ---

Tunnel (T) or Tunnel (^T)
	You can tunnel into some of the new terrain, although ice will cut
	you on its sharp edges.

Open a feature (o)
	Opening can be performed on some types of new terrain, such as
	curtains and cupboards.

Close a feature (c)
	Closing can now be used on chests to protect items in the same
	location as the chest from being stolen by monsters or damaged by
	magical attacks. Cupboards also provide this benefit. Closing
	previously locked doors will lock them again, although not as
	effectively as before.

Bash a feature (B) or Force a feature (f)
	Trees and other wooden features may be bashed to destroy them.

Disarm a feature (D)
	Doors may also be trapped, and trapped doors may be disarmed as
	a consequence.

--- Spell Commands ---


Browse a book (b) or Peruse a book (P)
	Browsing now allows you to select a spell in a spell books for
	a comprehensive list of what effects that spell has.

	All spell-using classes may read song books, but classes other
	that bards and shamans will only be able to use some of the spells
	from the book. Runestones may also be browsed by all classes,
	however runestones only permit more than one spell by combining two
	runestones together, so that at best you will have 4 spells available
	with 2 runestones, 9 spells with 3 runestones and so forth. The first
	runestone browsed determines the noun, the other runestones in your
	inventory acting as verbs to modify its effects. Runestones are best
	utilised by shamans as a result.

Gain new spells, prayers, songs or runes (G)
	You are not limited in Unangband to a maximum of 64 spells: instead
	your intelligence and books and runes available to you dictate what
	magic you can learn. Note that priests and paladins may also study
	at altars in the dungeon to learn spells: these are less useful in
	that the spells may only cast while standing on the altar until you
	discover the appropriate book they occur in. The various specialist
	classes may also learn spells earlier.

Cast a spell (m)
	You must possess the book or combination of runestones, or be standing
	on the appropriate altar to cast a spell. Note that all classes use this
	command to cast spells. In future versions (p) will be used to prepare
	items to make new magical items.
        
	You can also use this command to cancel singing a song, if you are a
	bard.

--- Object Manipulation Commands ---

Eat some food (E)
	You may also eat the fruit from various trees and bushes in the dungeon.

Fill or fuel an item (F)
	In addition to filling lanterns and torches, which you may also do to
	lanterns and torches in your pack or on the floor, you may also fill
	empty bottles and flasks from pools and fountains in the dungeon, in
	order to acquire potions and flasks of oil and other items.

Quaff a potion (q)
	You may quaff from pools of water and from fountains when you are 
	standing in them. Some of these may even have beneficial effects.

Inscribe an object ({)
	After inscribing an object, you will be prompted to see if you will
	always inscribe objects of this kind with this inscription.
	If you answer yes, item of that kind will be inscribed with the same
	inscription when identified. If the item is an ego-item, all objects
	of that ego-type will be auto-inscribed instead.

	The following additional inscriptions are available: =s, which stacks
	2 items with this inscription together as if all the force_stack options
	were available, =d which means you will never pick up an object with
	this inscription, =k which means you will destroy an object with this
	inscription instead of pick it up and =i which means you will never 
	remember an object with this inscription, so that it will not be
	displayed on the overhead map.

	In addition, the {good} pseudo-id is extended to include {very good} and
	{great} inscriptions to indicate that an item is increasingly powerful
	but not an ego item, and the {excellent} pseudo-id is extended to include
	{superb} pseudo-id which indicates the item in question is an ego item
	with a hidden power (Typically the more powerful ego objects).

Uninscribe an object (})
	After uninscribing an object, you will be prompted to see if you will
	remove the auto-inscription from objects of this kind. If you answer yes,
	items of that kind will no longer be automatically be inscribed. If the
	item is an ego-item, all objects of that ego-type will not be inscribed
	instead.

--- Magical Object Commands ---

Activate an worn object (A)
	The rings and dragon armours that may be activated may stack with 1
	instance of a charging item of the same type, if these items would
	normally stack if charged.

Aim a wand (a) or Zap a wand (z)
	With pval stacking, wands do not unstack until they are empty, and will
	only sometimes unstack if they are used while not identified.

Use a staff (u) or Zap a staff (Z)
	With pval stackign, staffs do not unstack until they are empty, and will
	only sometimes unstack if they are used while not identified. Staffs may
	also be wielded as weapons, for the most part having 1d6 damage, and
	possibly some special powers.

Zap a rod (z) or Activate a rod (a)
	Rods may stack with 1 instance of a charging rod of the same type.
	
Throw an item (v)
	In many instances, you may be able to throw part of the terrain you are
	on, if you are acting in desperation.

Look around (l) or Examine things (x)
	You can look at yourself to see the room description of the room you are
	in, and any object, monster or feature in a room other than the one you
	are in.

==== Attacking and Shooting ====

Monster armour class now reduces the damage inflicted by your weapons in melee,
at the same rate that your armor class reduces the effectiveness of some of their
attacks. However, monster hit points are also scaled down internally by the same
factor so that you will notice no difference in the effectiveness of your melee attacks.
Currently, monster recall displays the unscaled hit points, but this will be
changed in a future version.

However, this is not the case with spells, missiles and thrown weapons. As a result,
these attacks are up to 4 times as effective against more heavily armoured monsters,
than in vanilla.

To compensate, the multiplier from missile weapons is applied to the base missile
damage, before critical hits, or missile shooter or ammunition damage bonus is added.
This now makes the missile damage computation equivelent to melee damage. Missiles
should be roughly as effective as before, if not more so in some instances
(Remembering total damage is up to 4 times as effective, so only against the most
heavily armoured creatures, only bows/crossbows with a multiplier of x5 or higher
have the potential to be less effective than vanilla).

This also has the effect of rendering breath weapons less damaging than vanilla.
To compensate in a future version of Unangband, monsters will use a version of the
smarter Oangband 4GAI in order to choose the most effective attack against you.

Currently monsters do not use any additional information about player resistances
to determine which attack to use, even when smart monster AI is switched on.

Monster attacks now use the same routine as spells for damaging the player. This
allows monsters to have a variety of attacks that may correspond to breath weapon
types. In some instances for code simplicity, monster melee attacks may not
correspond with old vanilla attacks, but the difference should not be too noticeable.

Critical hit computation now takes account the weapon to hit bonus in order to
determine the chance of a critical and the total critical effectiveness. Actual
criticals have not been modified from vanilla, but may be so in a future verison
of Unangband.

Weapon styles will play an important for players who have chosen a particular weapon
style to specialise in. Most weapon styles are self-explainatory, and are listed on
the Character display screen with a 1 or 2 letter abbreviation.

One-handed style indicates a weapon of less than 20 lbs wielded without a shield.
Two-handed style indicates a weapon of 10 lbs or more wielded with a shield. If you
can qualify for both one-handed and two-handed style, you will pick the most
advantageous in your circumstances.

Characters may backstab with a sword of less than 10 lbs against a fleeing or
sleeping monster only.

Two weapons may be wielded in the following instances: when the two weapons are
the same specific type and of less than 15 lbs , or when the secondary weapon is a
sword of less than 10 lbs and the primary weapon is less than 20 lbs in weight.
The second weapon will be treated as twice as heavy, and the sum of weapon weights
combined for the purpose of determining multiple blows, and the secondary weapon
will be used to attack on every even numbered strike. Two-weapon combat provides
only the advantages that the second weapon provides in the instance where
no further style benefits are given. 

In order to qualify for the unarmed style, the player must not be wielding a weapon,
but may be carrying anything other than a weapon in their hands (In which case
they will use their feet to kick). Note that carrying anything other than a weapon
will not inhibit a skilled unarmed specialist from the advantages of their style.

Staffs may now be wielded as hafted weapons, inflicting 1d6 damage. Whips now only
do 1d4 damage. Darts are introduced as a 1d4 damage polearm equivelent to a dagger.

Spears are upgraded in name, so that a javelin is the equivelent of the old
spear, a spear is the equivelent of the old trident, and a two-handed spear is the
equivelent of the old Lance, but 10 lbs lighter. The related artifact weapons are
also upgraded, but have roughly the equivelent damage spread as previous. Currently
the Tridents of Ulmo and Wrath, and Lance of Eorlinga, are Two-Handed Spears, but
this will change in a future version.

Shields have percentage chance of stopping arrows when wielded, equal to the total
armour class bonus the shield provides. In a future version of Unangband, shields
will be upgraded in armour protection to roughly that provided in Oangband.

