This is a document file listing the changes in Zangband (compared to thestandard Angband 2.8.1.) No long explanations, just a list. See code fordetails. In reversed chronological order (more or less):ZAngband a2.3.0-Added the following changes from ZAngband 2.3.0:    -The number of spellpoints gained by casting 'Omnicide' is now     restricted to twice your maximum spellpoints.    -'Teleport level' effects won't have any effect on quest-levels     if the 'no upstairs' ironman mode is active.    -Orc and Troll pits will no longer contain undead trolls or orcs.    -The DOS version now uses BMP files instead of the patented GIF     format.    -Fixed a graphics glitch with beam spells and permanent walls.    -Fixed an inaccessible area in one of the vaults.    -Added Greg Wooledge's fix for a compilation problem on various     Linux systems.    -The "laser eye" mutation will now properly anger pets and     friendly monsters.    -Fixed a bug in the "research monster" building command.    -The time-command now displays the turn number.    -The level-teleport from the pattern is now restricted to downward     in ironman mode, but allows to get down to the bottom of the     dungeon if you already finished off the Serpent.    -Lit arena levels no longer reveal the whole level and the objects.    -The Windows version will now try to create missing directories.     (Eric Bock)-Moved the level generation code around a bit more.-Turned the "center_player" option default off.-Added a new "munchkin" startup option that helps various "illegal" race/class combinations. As with the other "munchkin" options, it does not affect scoring. (This replaces the old "MONK_HACK" compile-time option.)-Some "munchkin" options are not displayed unless applicable.-The player can now choose a random character name.-New varieties of dragon pits were added, encompassing almost all dragon types except for the oddest and toughest.-Character dumps describe all *ID*'ed random artifacts.-Roman numerals placed at the end of the player name will increment at character birth.-"player_symbols" gives players different colored symbols in text modeZAngband a2.2.6-Added a new Ironman option to always generate "arena" levels.-Added a new startup option that controls terrain streamer generation (is off by default!).-Added two new "munchkin" startup options: one allows Mindcrafters to get Dimension Door, and another turns the death save off (in a way). Neither affects scoring, but both are displayed on character dumps.-Added a new Ironman option to always generate very unusual rooms. (This corresponds to the "evil.patch".)-Fiddled a little with the TY_CURSE code (to prevent paralyze/Cyberdemon as result of certain things).-The "vanilla town" option is now on by default.-Added these bug-fixes from ZAngband 2.2.6c:    -*Really* fixed the bug that could cause crashes when finishing a random     quest.    -Several changes to the 'Old Castle' quest. Replaced the "unknown grids"     with normal floor. Fixed a bug that placed Mother Hydra instead of     Death Knights. The reward is now correctly placed in front of the inn.     You will now fail the quest when leaving without completing it first.    -Fixed a bug that caused beam spells to do double damage at the end of     the beam.    -The casino will throw you out if you don't have money.    -Fixed a glitch in the description of the snotlings.-Added Eric Bock's wizard allocation patch.-Adapted Eric Bock's player centering scroll patch.ZAngband 2.2.6-Added a new quest and 3 new artifacts by Shayne Steele.-Added a new quest by John I'anson-Holton.-Added Mark Kvale's labyrinth rooms.-The Alter (+) command will close an open door, as the documentation says it does.-The monster memory will now record the lack of attacks of some monsters.-Fixed some small bugs in the documentation.-Fixed some bugs that prevented display of the correct message when failing some of the quests.-The quest stairs will no longer be placed on objects.-Disintegration spells will no longer affect grass and dirt and disintegrated trees will leave behind a patch of grass.-Cleaned up the handling of non-living monsters.-Monsters detected by magic are now correctly marked as seen in the monster memory.-Rewards for killing uniques are no longer depending on the "speaking uniques" option.-Fixed several small bugs in the monster definitions.-Fixed a bug that prevented the proper assignment of the Water Cave quest.-Fixed a bug in the distribution of charges for thrown wands and rods.-Fixed a bug that prevented Eldritch Horrors detected by telepathy or magic from blasting your sanity.-Secret doors the player reveals are sometimes locked or jammed.-Doubled the maximum number of objects and monsters per level.-The spell list now uses colors.-The savefile loading code now always shows the correct version number.-Fixed a compilation problem in the X11 module when compiling with graphics turned off.-Fixed a compilation problem on Solaris and SGI machines.ZAngband 2.2.5e-Recharging wands, staffs, and rods is now easier and more powerful.-Fixed a bug that could crash the game when recharging wands or staves with many charges.-Fixed a bug that created overcharged wands when purchasing wands from stores.-The black market will now often carry stacks of wands, rods, and staves.-Fixed a bug in trump magic's Mind Blast spell that could crash the game.-Fixed a bug in the pricing of the recharge services for staves.-The Windows version will now prevent saving and exiting the game while reading a scroll to stop certain abuses.ZAngband 2.2.5d-Spells that ask for a direction or an item to apply the spell to, can now be canceled without losing a turn or mana.-Fixed a bug in Z 2.2.5c that lowered the hitpoints of many monsters.-Fixed two small bugs in the vaults.-Blue horrors will now appear near the location of the killed Pink horror.ZAngband 2.2.5c-Fixed a bug that prevented locked doors from detection with spells.-Fixed a compilation problem in main-gcu.c for curses versions support for colors.-Fixed a bug that allowed stacked staves to be overcharged in the tower of sorcery.-Fixed some bugs in the new vaults.-Fixed a bug that messed up the order of quests in the town Telmora.-Fixed a bug that allowed Farmer Maggot's dogs to speak when dying and to be wanted for crimes.-Fixed a bug in the definition of the 16x16 tile for angels.-Compiled the DOS version with the up-to-date version of Allegro 3.11. This should improve compatibility with various sound- and graphic-cards.-The Windows version no longer requires the ZAngband.ini file to be present.-Added an experimental terminal window option to show a player-centered overhead view of the dungeon.ZAngband 2.2.5b-Quest monsters that have been teleported away by destruction spells will now be healed.-Fixed a bug that caused the game to hang when entering some of the shops.-Fixed a typo in "melee2.c" that influenced speaking uniques.-The buildings in the "lite" town are not correctly initialized.-Long rumors (more than 80 characters) will no longer cause error messages.-Bug in the price calculation of wands fixed.-Changed the windows resizing in the Windows version a bit.ZAngband 2.2.5-Added an option to unify the item commands like "zap a rod", "use a staff", "eat food", "aim a wand", ... into a "use object" command.-Bloodletters of Khorne drop Blades of Chaos less often.-Randomized the parameters for dungeon creation to produce more different dungeon layouts.-Character dumps will now include the inventories of all homes.-Empty slots in homes and the player inventory are no longer displayed in the character dumps and spaces are stripped from the line endings.-Added Eric Bock's unbiased RNG as an startup-option.-Added a modified version of Matt Graham's speaking uniques patch. The lines for every speaking unique are now user-defineable for the fearful, friendly and normal monsters and the death of the monster.-Added lines for Farmer Maggots dogs.-Farmer Maggot, Martti Ihrasaari, and Fundin Bluecloak are now friendly, but will fight back if attacked (or aggravated).-The Shadow Cloak of Luthien now provides light- and dark-resistance.-The confusion resistance granted by chaos resistance is now displayed.-Telekinetic powers no longer work on items in vaults.-Several small changes to the "City beneath the sea" quest.-Various quest related bugs have been fixed.-Changed the autoroller to the Angband 2.8.3 layout.-Pets will not try to shoot spells through the player.-Two bugs in the easy_pickup option fixed. The correct message will be displayed when picking up an object from a stack including money. Switching between inventory and equipment lists when selecting an object will now correctly update the display.-Fixed a bug that displayed the quest-completed message again when killing summoned monsters in an already completed fixed quest.-The descriptions for the lightning ball (radius 3) and the balance dragon scale mail activation are now correctly displayed.-Fixed a bug that caused the wilderness to be reinitialized when leaving a building even if not necessary.-Fixed a bug with the monster-tracking of some spells.-Fixed a typo and a wrong terrain feature in the "Logrus Master" quest.-Fixed a small error in the character history of vampires.-Fixed several bugs in the research monster building command.-Monster recall no longer shows the "You feel an intense desire to kill this monster." message if you have not met the creature yet.-Added Keldon Jones' new main-gcu files with support for multiple windows, color redefinition and special character support.Thanks to Topi Ylinen for the following changes:-Many monsters have been tweaked a bit (mainly rebalancing hitpoints).-Potions of Healing and *Healing* are now more common on the deeper levels.-Two new quests added.-New quest-failed texts for several quests.-The 8x8 tiles have been slightly edited and various errors in the tile definitions have been fixed.-The command to dump the "Knowledge menu" lists into a file (with 'f' or 'F') is available again.The following changes are taken from Leon Marick's OAngband:-Added the enhanced wand and rod stacking.-Confused monsters cannot steal items.ZAngband 2.2.4-Most fixed quests will now be marked as failed if you leave before completing your goal.-Changed the "Druid's Shop" quest to a "Logrus Master" quest.-Added 33 new vaults designed by Chris Weisiger.-Chests produce less gold and more items; all chest items are at least "good" (like in GWAngband).-Increased the randomness of long-range teleport effects to decrease the frequency of consecutive teleports "bouncing" the player between two or three different spots (also from GWAngband).-Golems have now a penality to dexterity (-2).-Mindcrafters no longer get the 'dimension door' power.-Toned down The Katana of Groo and Stormbringer.-Toned down the number of extra attacks on random artifacts.-The quests from the magic towers are now only available for members of the towers realm.-Added a note about the startup-options to the prompts at birth.-Fixed a bug that could crash the game when making strange offers while haggling.-Corrected the damage calculation for slays and brands in the weaponsmaster.-Fixed a bug in the Amberites 'shadow shifting' ability while in quests.-Fixed a bug that could turn monster hitpoints negative when draining charges from magical items.-Monsters attacked by other monsters will now always wake up.-Fixed a typo in the description of 'Cthugha, the Living Flame'.-Added a patch by Julian Lighton, that changes the way effects like Mind Wave interact with special critters like Pink Horrors and Warriors of the Dawn.-Changed the Windows port to support easier resizing of the windows and display of scores.  Also removed the Abort menu item.-Added a modified 'main-x11.c' file by Denis Eropkin.-The wall creation spells like "Wall of Stone" no longer create a wall directly on the player.-Corrected the pluralization of some monsters.-Added an updated short building documentation and a new rumor file with many new and changed rumors (thanks to Juergen Neitzel). The total number of rumors is now 613.ZAngband 2.2.3d-Fixed a bug that caused food to become invisible after switching from the 8x8 tiles to ASCII mode.-Fixed a bug in the loading of magic realm specific pref-files. Macros and other preferences in files with the names "Life.prf", "Sorcery.prf", "Nature.prf", "Chaos.prf", "Death.prf", "Trump.prf", and "Arcane.prf" are now automatically loaded for magic users with these realms.-Fixed a small memory leak in the research monster option.-Fixed a bug in the chaos realm spell "Meteor swarm".-ZAngband will no longer try to place Sea-Trolls in troll pits.-Corrected hitpoints of lesser krakens and Yig, Father of Serpents.-Friendly monsters will no longer be wanted for crimes.-Undead players races will start the game at midnight.ZAngband 2.2.3c-Fixed a bug in the weaponsmaster that could cause the inventory to get corrupted.-Worked around a bug in the optimizer of the Windows MS VC compiler that caused all entries in the list of racial powers and mutations to be labeled with "a)".-Fixed a bug that allowed the player to gain full knowledge about all monsters.-Kamikaze yeeks and Leprechaun fanatics are now fearless.-Fixed a bug in the "polymorph self" routine that could cause crashes.-Restored the 'Hellfire' spell to it's former glory. Evil monsters take extra damage, all others normal damage.-Fixed a bug that allowed the player to fire anything with a bow that is too heavy to wield comfortably.-Fixed a bug that could place the player inside rubble after recalling down into the dungeon.ZAngband 2.2.3b-The algorithm for the selection of random quest monsters is now less likely to choose an easy monster, especially on the deeper levels.-Prevented savefile-scumming of the casino.-Fixed a bug that sometimes caused monsters in quests to share the same position with the player.-Fixed a bug that allowed up-stairs to be created in the 'no climbing up' mode on quest-levels.-Fixed the palette of the 16x16.bmp for the Windows version.-Fixed the 16x16 tiles for 'Wolf, Farmer Maggot's dog' and the 'insect swarm'.-Fixed a bug in the vanilla_town option that could cause the player to be trapped in permanent walls.ZAngband 2.2.3-Improved the initialization- and game-speed and reduced memory requirements.-Added a menu for startup options (press '=' at character generation to enter it).-Added a 'vanilla town' startup-option, that disables the wilderness, buildings and quests (but you can still use the random quests).-Added several 'ironman' startup-options, like 'all stores closed', 'no climbing upwards', 'always small levels', and 'always autoscum'.-Added a menu for 'pet commands' (press 'p' to access it).  You can call them to you, send them out to kill monsters, dismiss them, and allow/dissallow opening of door and picking up items. Your pets will drop all picked up items when you disallow them to pick up anything.-Greatly lowered the fail-rates of the trump spells.-Trump summoning spells will now only summon hostile monsters if the spell fails.-Rangers start now with a short-bow, a dagger and some arrows instead of the broad-sword.-High-mages will now start with a wand of magic missile.-Changed the monster AI to allow monster groups to surround the player in arena levels and in the wilderness.-Completely changed the item enchantment and recharge services of the buildings and adjusted the prices.-You can now also enchant bolts and shots in the Rangers guild.-Changed the Weaponsmaster to display the weapon-damage including the players bonus to damage.-Random quest monsters may now appear in groups or with escorts.-Changed the creation of trees in the dungeon to a more reasonable layout.-Added a new room type with four pillars.-Lowered the odds of ammunition breaking when thrown/fired.-Changed the display of racial powers and mutations to show fail rates.-Adjusted the 'shriek' mutation.-Changed the 'Hellfire' spell. Now it hurts Good, Evil resist, and others take normal damage.-Fixed a bug in the mindcrafter 'psychometry' spell that could cause crashes.-Fixed a bug in the rumors code that produced *strange* rumors.-You no longer receive "The sun has risen/fallen" messages when in a quest.-The 'Living Trump' spell now correctly gives 'random teleportation' or the 'teleport control' ability.-Golems, skeletons, zombies, vampires and spectres no longer get food rations at character birth. Vampires no longer get scrolls of light.-Fixed a bug that messed up quest-descriptions with single quotes in the text.-The 'banish evil' mutation no longer affects quest monsters or uniques.-'Swordsman' will now be correctly pluralized.-The 'Eric's Stronghold' quest in the 'lite' town is rewarded correctly.-A bug that caused *strange* problems when the sound of the DOS version was enabled was "fixed" by disabling MOD-file support.-Fixed a bug in the initialization of realm dependent buildings.-Added a bunch of new 16x16 tiles by Adam Bolt.-Updated the ZAngband FAQ and the documentation a bit.-The following bugfixes and patches are taken from Tim Baker's ZAngbandTk:-Added the 'easy floor' option. You can now select an item from a stack on the floor by browsing a list.-Fixed a bug that prevented the player from entering a new wilderness area if the target grid was lava or water.-The monster-health bar is now correctly updated.-The 'Cowardice' mutation is now correctly handled.-Animal pack monsters will now flee correctly if afraid.-Fixed a bug that could cause the mindcrafters spell-points to go below zero if a failed spell caused a mana-storm.-Friendly monsters and pets are now a bit more careful in the selection of targets for distance attacks.-Monsters falling asleep from an psi-attack are now correctly noted.-Escaping from an earthquake works now correctly.-Monsters that are embedded in rock after an earthquake are now killed.-Snaga sappers will now explode when killed.ZAngband 2.2.2d-Having mutations will now slow down hitpoint regeneration and reduce the hitpoints healed from draining monsters with a vampiric weapon. Beastman are affected less by this effect.-The door creation spell no longer creates a door directly on the player.-Added many new rumors by Juergen Neitzel.-Fixed the display of the life rating.-Fixed the wilderness mode prompt.-ZAngband now removes the '.lok' file when quiting at character generation on systems where VERIFY_SAVEFILE is defined.-Removed the space after Thorondor's name in r_info.txt.-Beholders are now worth less experience than the undead beholders.-Really fixed the bug in the 'Eric's Stronghold' quest.-Fixed the articles of the new armors.-The 'Assault on Montsalvat' quest is now only available to Paladins of Death.-Fixed two bugs in the monster polymorph code.-Changed the prompt when quitting (commiting suicide).-Changed the behaviour of the automatic trap disarming. Traps that can't affect you are now ignored.-Disintegration spells no longer affect water or lava.-Fixed a bug in the artifact activation code that prevented artifact dragon scale mails from activating correctly.-Scrolls of artifact creation no longer affect dragon scale mails.-Splitted up the source code into smaller files.ZAngband 2.2.2c-The chaos tower can now remove mutations.-Fixed a bug in the layout of the M$ quest.-Fixed a bug that made pack animal fearless.-Fixed a bug that could hang the game in mountain areas.-Fixed several spelling errors.-Fixed a bug that prevented already killed uniques from being revived for a quest.-Fixed a bug that allowed normal sized levels to be created when the 'always create small dungeon-levels' option is active.-Fixed a bug that caused monsters to cast spells at the player even if they can't hit the player with the spell.-Fixed several bugs in the M$ quest.-Fixed a bug in the 'Eric's Stronghold' quest.-Fixed a bug in the R'Lyeh quest.-Fixed a bug that allowed monsters that can 'destroy weaker monsters' to destroy quest monsters.-Fixed a bug that caused the extra attacks from mutations to sometimes "kill" an already dead monster.-Changed the vampiric mutation to act like the racial activation.-The mindcrafter 'psychometry' spell now can pseudo-id already sensed items.-Added Jesse Jones' updated main-mac.c file (used for the Mac versions) with improved handling of multiple monitors, arg_graphics is saved with the preferences, and a much more attractive alert window.ZAngband 2.2.2-Fixed a bug that could crash the game when entering any area around the town 'Angwil'.-Fixed the 'wilderness mode' prompt.-Allowed the dropping of items and running in forests.-Pressing ESCAPE at the prompt for your bet in the gambling house works now correctly.-Fixed a graphics glitch with beam spells and permanent walls.-'Word of recall' works now also outside of the towns.-Golems, Zombies, Vampires, ... no longer can get food in the inns.-You have now to pay for rumors in the inn.-Dworkin Barimen has now a chance to drop the Jewel of Judgement.-You can no longer kick aquatic monsters in the ankle.-Removed a duplicated 'You have completed your quest!' when summoning and killing a monster in an already completed quest.-Killing monsters with the explosion of a thrown potion gives now experience.-Fixed the 'You see (nothing).' message that can appear in an obscure constellation involving a skeleton quaffing a potion of detonation.-Set the default state of the first two terminal windows to 'Display messages' and 'Display inven/equip'.-Set the default state for the list and look commands to expanded mode.-'Trap Creation' only affects floor grids now.-Added 4 new quests designed by Topi Ylinen.-Added 5 new quests designed by Jeff Coleburn.-Changed some other quests slightly.-Added the Rod of Pesticide (fast charging, activates for a low damage poison cloud).-Changed the behavior of earthquake/destruction spells in quests. In random quests these spells try to teleport away quest monsters, before the area caves in, in predefined quests these spells do nothing.-Changed the (Mass-)Genocide spells to prevent them from working in predefined quests.-Fixed the pluralization of various monster names.-Bloodletters of Khorne may now drop magical blades of chaos.-Added a draft of the new ZAngband-FAQ.-Various other bugfixes.ZAngband 2.2.1-Changed the scores file back to the old pre-2.2.0 file-format, Score-files from version 2.2.0 won't work!  The installation will overwrite the 'lib/apex/scores.raw' file by default, so if you want to keep your old scores file then make a backup before installing.-Added friendly monsters.-Added a 'no wilderness' mode for slower systems. The mode can be selected when starting a new character and when importing a 2.1.1c or older savefile. A special town with quests and buildings has been added for this mode.-Bloodletters of Khorne drop now a Blade of Chaos when killed.-Pink horrors split into two Blue Horrors when killed.-Allowed easy addition of new monsters to r_info.txt.-Various optimizations to improve game speed.-Added a cold aura to some monsters.-Added an option to switch on 'hard quests' on character birth and when importing old savefiles.-Fixed a bug in the 'Reset Recall' spell.-Fixed problems with the 'Vault' quest.-Added a home to the town Telmora.-Changed the 'look' command to ignore boring terrains.-Changed the damage when walking over shallow lava.-Fixed a bug that allowed creation of townspeople in the dungeon.-Changed the behaviour of the 'magic mapping' spell.-Fixed a bug that allowed monsters to ignore 'glyphs of warding' and 'exploding runes'.-Fixed bugs in the 'absorb light' mutation.-Fixed a bug that sometimes prevented the creation of 'connected stairs' and caused lookups when killing the last quest-monster.-Fixed a bug that hangs the game when displaying the contents of your houses after quitting or dying.-Various changes in the monster definitions.-Fixed the k_info.txt entry of the Trifurcate Spear.-Removed some disturbing messages.-'Detect treasure' no longer detects monsters represented with an '*'.-Prevented the use of 'Alter Reality' in quests.-Changed the description of ~ in the 'identify symbol' command.-Changed some of the 8x8 tiles.-Hagen has now a high chance to drop his spear.-Fixed the 'cursed items as quest rewards' bug.ZAngband 2.2.0-Added 279 new monsters and the corresponding 8x8 sized tiles designed and drawed by Topi Ylinen.-Added 46 new items (weapons, armor, and ammo) designed by John Duffin and Leigh Silas Hanrihan.-Added exploding, aquatic, swimming, and flying monsters.-Added new monster melee attacks (time, explode, and disease).-Added Ken Wigles KAngband style town, quests and terrains.-Changed quest system to allow more flexibility and multi-level quests.-Added big wilderness outside the towns with a modified fractal terrain generator from KAmband.-New initialization code for quests, towns, buildings and wilderness.-Removed the 64 kByte limits for monsters, items, artifacts, and vaults.-Moved the definition of the limits for the number of monsters, items, vaults, ... to an external data-file.-Added Keldon Jones patch to allow automatic recreation of the raw-files.-Added "equippy chars" in the inventory, equipment list and in shops.-Fixed the definitions of the new tiles for the Half-Ogres and Dark-Elfes.-Added support for the S-Lang scripting language, based on Scott Bigham's S-Lang patch.-Added Greg Wooledge's patch that adds the "flag grid" to Zangband char dumps and shows immunities in the "flag grid".-The Windows version no longer requires "LibPath" to be set correctly. This allows installation in any directory without changes to the ini-file.-Allowed random selection of race, class, realms, ... at character birth with the * key.-Added the Easy-Patch by Tim Baker and changed it to be an option.-Added 52 new mutations created by Jeff Duprey.-Changed the pet AI to make the pets more useful.-Added new sound-events.-Only uniques will now resist disintegration effects.-Warrior-Mages can now choose Sorcery.-Many other changes and bugfixes.[old changes snipped -- Prfnoff]