    Note: Although pressing ? on the introduction screen 
    will take you here, and this page does give a quick 
    overview of much in the game, it is not the main page 
    for the entire help system. Press ! if you wish to 
    access other parts of the FrogComposband help.

Creating a Character

FrogComposband is a role-playing game in which you - the player - 
control a character in a dangerous world of myth and magic, populated 
with demons, dragons, deities, ducks and other rare and strange 
creatures of the Last Days. The most important decision you make on 
your quest to slay the Serpent of Chaos is what kind of character to 
play: spell-wielding magician or sword-waving warrior? Stealthy rogue 
or musical bard? Holy priest or evil spawn of chaos? The choices are 
myriad, and the process of generating a new character is described in 
this help file, which will also serve to introduce you to many of the 
core concepts of the game.

Character creation, or birth, is controlled through a variety of 
choices. You must choose your character's race (Human, Dwarf, Hobbit, 
Ogre, Vampire, Werewolf, etc), your character's class (Warrior, Mage, 
Priest, Lawyer, etc) and your character's personality (Mighty, Shrewd, 
Chaotic, Split, etc). Each of these choices is described in the help 
files (see [a]).

There are three main screens for the birth process. The first is a 
brief welcome screen in which you select the type of game to play (the 
Game Mode). The next screen allows you to select or change your race, 
class, gender, personality and character's name. The final screen 
allows you to enter your starting stats. We will describe each of these 
screens in detail, explaining things as we go. Ready?

The Welcome Screen
The first screen is the Welcome Screen. It simply introduces you to the 
game and allows you to choose one of several options that will control 
the birth process. It looks something like this:
  
  Welcome to FrogComposband, a dungeon exploration role-playing game.
  Your goal is to defeat the dreaded Serpent of Chaos, but before you can       
  face it, you must battle many foes. Your first step is to create a            
  character for this quest. The following screens will guide you through        
  this process so that you may quickly begin playing. You can get general       
  help at any time by pressing ?.                                               
                                                                                
  First, you must decide what type of game to play. Beginner Mode limits
  the options available, simplifying things for new players.                    
                                                                                
   Choose the Type of Game to Play                                              
    b) Beginner                                                                 
    n) Normal                                                                   
    m) Monster                                                                  
                                                                                
    =) Options                                                                  
    ?) Help                                                                     
    s) View Scores                                                              
  ESC) Quit                                                                     
                                                                                
  Tip: You can often get specific help by entering the uppercase letter         
       for a command. For example, type B on this screen to receive help        
       on Beginner Mode.                                                        
  

If you are new to the game, consider the Beginner mode. With this 
option, you won't be so overwhelmed with choices as is normally the 
case, allowing you to breeze through the birth process and quickly 
begin playing (and enjoying) this game. Once you have played a few 
times and wish to experience more of what the game has to offer, 
including a vast wilderness with many diverse dungeons to explore and 
the full array of race, class and personality choices, then you should 
choose the Normal mode.

If you are truly bold you can experiment with the Monster option, which 
allows you to play as one of many different types of monster. Monsters 
don't have a class, but instead evolve into more powerful forms as they 
gain experience. They also tend to have variable body types, making the 
equipment sub-game both more fun and more challenging.

Also on this screen may be an option to Quick Start. This option simply 
repeats the birth selections of your previous character, who presumably 
just met an untimely demise. This is a useful option if you are dying 
often in the early game, as it greatly speeds up the birth process.

The Race/Class Screen
On this screen, you can change your race, your class and (unless you 
picked Beginner Mode) your personality. The screen will look something 
like the following:
  
  Name : Fatty Bolger                    Game Speed: Coffee-Break
  Sex  : Male                 STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  Life  BHP  Exp
  Pers : Ordinary              +0   +0   +0   +0   +0   +0  100%       100%     
  Race : Hobbit                -2   +1   +1   +3   +2   +1   92%  +14  120%     
  Class: Rogue                 +2   +1   -1   +3   +1   +1  100%  +12  125%     
  Magic: Burglary           == +0   +2   +0   +6   +3   +2   92%  +26  150%
                                                                                
    n) Change Name                 *) Random Name                               
    s) Change Sex                  ?) Help                                      
    p) Change Personality          =) Options                                   
    r) Change Race               TAB) More Info                                 
    c) Change Class              RET) Next Screen                               
    m) Change Magic              ESC) Prev Screen                               
    g) Change Game Speed        
                                                                                
  Tip: You can often get specific help by entering the uppercase letter         
       for a command. For example, type R on this screen to receive help        
       on your currently selected race.                                         
  
So, what do we see? First, the fields in blue are those that you may 
change on this screen. Default selections are already in (and sane 
enough to play with), but you probably want to change them and make 
your own picks. Your sex is essentially just flavor, and has almost no 
game-play effects (choices are limited to simply Male and Female, but 
at least the game is progressive enough to provide ways to swap between 
those during play!). The other selections you can make are much more 
important, though: your race, class, personality, and magic realms (if 
any) will form the key to your character.

To the right is a table displaying information about the stat bonuses 
and other modifiers you would receive from your current race, class and 
personality choices. Every character has six basic attributes, called 
stats, that are very important to game play; finding ways to increase 
your stats will be one of your main practical goals during the game. 
The six basic stats are: Strength (STR), Intelligence (INT), Wisdom 
(WIS), Dexterity (DEX), Constitution (CON) and Charisma (CHR); see [b] 
below for more detailed information. Your character's spell stat, if 
any, is displayed in violet; this is a very important stat for magical 
classes, since it determines how well the character can cast spells, 
and normally you want it to be as high as possible.

On the next screen, you will choose the starting stats for this 
character, and the values you choose will be modified by the amount 
shown in the table. The bottom row in the table is the total row, 
showing you a nice summary of the cumulative effects of your various 
birth choices. It is the value in this row that gets added to your 
starting stats.

Other fields in the table include:
  Life: Life Rating Multiplier. This value multiplies your maximum hit 
        points (HP). Hit points are your character's health; if your 
        hit points go below zero, you die and the game is over! See [c] 
        for more on how your maximum hit points are calculated.
  BHP:  Short for Base Hit Points, this value is a lump sum added to 
        your starting hit points to make the early game easier.
  Exp:  Short for Experience Factor, this percentage determines how 
        quickly or slowly your character gains new levels. (All players 
        begin at level 1, and may advance up to level 50. Increasing 
        your level gives more hit points, improves your skills, gives 
        access to more powerful spells, and may also provide other 
        effects or bonuses.)

In addition to stats, your player also has skills (see [d] below). For 
example, your Melee skill determines your ability to hit monsters in 
hand to hand combat. Like stats, these skills are also affected by your 
birth options, and are displayed in the information table on this and 
the next screen; but, since your screen is only so wide, you'll need to 
use the TAB key:
  
  Name : Fatty Bolger                    Game Speed: Coffee-Break
  Sex  : Male                  Disarming  Device     Save       Stealth         
  Pers : Ordinary              Fair       Fair       Fair       Fair            
  Race : Hobbit                Superb     Very Good  Good       Superb          
  Class: Rogue                 Excellent  Excellent  Fair       Very Good       
  Magic: Burglary           == Superb     Superb     Good       Heroic          
  
And TAB again:
  
  Name : Fatty Bolger                    Game Speed: Coffee-Break
  Sex  : Male                  Searching  Perception Melee      Archery         
  Pers : Ordinary              Fair       Fair       Fair       Fair            
  Race : Hobbit                Heroic     Superb     Bad        Very Good       
  Class: Rogue                 Fair       Fair       Excellent  Very Good       
  Magic: Burglary           == Good       Good       Very Good  Excellent       
  
Ah, we see that hobbits aren't so good at melee. However, the class 
choice of Rogue more than makes up for this, and we can tell from the 
summary line that this character's melee skill will be pretty good. It 
is a general rule that class influences skills more than race and 
personality do, especially later in the game (as you gain levels, you 
also gain skill bonuses, but mostly through your class). The main 
exception to this rule is Stealth, where the bonuses tend to be zero.

Below the player fields and the information table is a list of commands 
that you may choose. These commands might bring up a menu of choices 
for you to select from, as, for example, the Change Race command:
  
  Name : Fatty Bolger                    Game Speed: Coffee-Break
  Sex  : Male                  Searching  Perception Melee      Archery         
  Pers : Ordinary              Fair       Fair       Fair       Fair            
  Race : Hobbit                Heroic     Superb     Bad        Very Good       
  Class: Rogue                 Fair       Fair       Excellent  Very Good       
  Magic: Burglary           == Good       Good       Very Good  Excellent       
                                                                                
  Choose a Type of Race to Play                                                 
    a) Human                                                                    
    b) Elf                                                                      
    c) Hobbit/Dwarf                                                             
    d) Fairy                                                                    
    e) Angel/Demon                                                              
    f) Orc/Troll/Giant                                                          
    g) Shapeshifter                                                             
    h) Undead                                                                   
    i) Other                                                                    
    *) Random                                                                   
  
Aternatively, the command might take effect immediately, as with the 
Change Sex command. Or, if you use the Change Name command, you can 
edit your character's name directly in place:
  
  Name : Skinny Dipper                   Game Speed: Coffee-Break
  Sex  : Male                  Searching  Perception Melee      Archery         
  Pers : Ordinary              Fair       Fair       Fair       Fair            
  Race : Hobbit                Heroic     Superb     Bad        Very Good       
  Class: Rogue                 Fair       Fair       Excellent  Very Good       
  Magic: Burglary           == Good       Good       Very Good  Excellent       
                                                                                
    n) Change Name                 *) Random Name                               
    s) Change Sex                  ?) Help                                      
    p) Change Personality          =) Options                                   
    r) Change Race               TAB) More Info                                 
    c) Change Class              RET) Next Screen                               
    m) Change Magic              ESC) Prev Screen                               
    g) Change Game Speed        
                                                                                
  Tip: You can often get specific help by entering the uppercase letter         
       for a command. For example, type R on this screen to receive help        
       on your currently selected race.                                         
  
Changing the game speed does not affect your character directly; 
rather, it selects the type of game you wish to play. The options are 
normal (a full game with a wilderness), coffee-break (an accelerated 
game with no wilderness) and instant-coffee (an ultra-accelerated 
game). Game speed selection is not available in Beginner Mode, where 
the coffee-break setting is always used.

When you are happy with your character choices, press RET to move on to 
the next screen. You can always ESC to back up and make changes, so 
experiment as much as you want.

The Stats Screen
On this screen, you enter your starting stats. You do this by 
allocating points to each stat; you have a total of 30 points to spend, 
though you can get some more by allocating negative points to stats you 
really don't care about at all. Very high starting stats are expensive. 
By default, the game tries to guess a reasonable allocation, and if you 
are a new player, you might just want to use the defaults.

Here is a sample screen:
  
  Name : Fatty Bolger                    Game Speed: Coffee-Break
  Sex  : Male                 STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  Life  BHP  Exp      
  Pers : Ordinary              +0   +0   +0   +0   +0   +0  100%       100%     
  Race : Hobbit                -2   +1   +1   +3   +2   +1   92%  +14  120%     
  Class: Rogue                 +2   +1   -1   +3   +1   +1  100%  +12  125%     
  Magic: Burglary           == +0   +2   +0   +6   +3   +2   92%  +26  150%
                                                                                
  Enter Your Starting Stats                                                     
           Base  Pts  Mod  Total                                                
  s/S) STR   16   10   +0     16     n) Change Name                             
  i/I) INT   16   10   +2     18     ?) Help                                    
  w/W) WIS    9   -2   +0      9     =) Options                                 
  d/D) DEX   16   10   +6  18/40   TAB) More Info                               
  c/C) CON   14    3   +3     17   RET) Begin Play                              
  r/R) CHR   10   -1   +2     12   ESC) Prev Screen                             
                  30                                                            
                                                                                
  Note: You may adjust each starting stat using the indicated keys. The         
        lower case key decrements while the upper case increments the           
        starting value. Values may range from 8 to 17 and each value that       
        you enter is charged the indicated number of points. You only           
        have 30 points to spend, so be sure to adjust those stats that
        matter most.                                                            
  
Follow the instructions to make changes. If your point total exceeds 
30, the option to begin playing will be disabled until you decrease 
your overall score. When you are ready, press ENTER to begin play!

Where to Go from Here?
You can begin playing at this point. Use the help system (?) to learn 
the basic commands. You may also wish to read some additional help 
files, like the [e] General Information document or the [f] Newbie 
Guide; they explain more about what you'll be up against, and contain 
tips to help get you started. There is much more in the in-game help 
besides, but you probably don't really want to bury yourself in 500 
pages of documentation!

Character Attributes
During the game (and even during the birth process), you will see many 
different numerical values that are used to measure or determine your 
character's relative skills and abilities. Here's a quick overview:

  Statistics
  Each character has six basic statistics (or more simply stats). These 
  are strength, intelligence, wisdom, dexterity, constitution and 
  charisma, and they modify the abilities of the character in a variety 
  of ways. For example, strength affects your carrying capacity, the 
  amount of damage you do to a monster when you hit it, and the number 
  of blows per round you get with a weapon. See [g] below for more 
  detail on the basic statistics.
  
  Experience (EXP/XP)
  Experience affects almost everything else about your character. 
  Experience is mostly gained by slaying monsters, but can also be 
  earned by casting spells for the first time, disarming traps or 
  unlocking doors. Certain classes may also gain experience by 
  destroying specific dungeon spellbooks, and there are potions in the 
  dungeon that will boost your experience if you quaff them. The 
  Android race follows its own unique experience rules.
  
  When your character's experience crosses certain fixed boundaries, 
  you will attain a new character level (up to a maximum of 50). When 
  this happens, your hit point pool, mana pool (if any) and primary 
  skills will all increase; you might also gain new powers or 
  abilities, or get to improve a stat of your choice. The character 
  level boundaries depend on the Experience Factor noted above.
  
  Certain monsters can "drain" your experience, and thus potentially 
  also lower your character level. Luckily, you can restore drained 
  experience through magical means, through town services, or simply by 
  regaining the experience all over again.
  
  Gold (AU)
  Each character starts with some gold, which can be used to buy items 
  and services from the shops and other buildings in towns. More gold 
  can be obtained by selling items to the shops, taking it from the 
  corpses of dead monsters, mining it, or simply by finding it lying on 
  the dungeon floor.
  
  Hit Points (HP)
  Each character has hit points, representing how much damage the 
  character can sustain before he dies. Your HP pool depends on your 
  character level, race, class, personality, constitution, equipment 
  and life rating, and can be temporarily boosted with magic; see [h] 
  for a detailed explanation. Lost hit points may be regained by 
  resting, or by a variety of magical means.
  
  Spell Points (SP/Mana)
  Many characters have spell points, or mana, which represents how many 
  spells they can cast. Your mana pool depends on your character level, 
  class, the primary spellcasting stat of your class, and any penalties 
  from sources like excessively heavy armor (see [i]). Lost spell 
  points may be regained by resting or by magical means.
  
  Skills
  Each character has several primary skills: disarming, magic device 
  skill, saving throw, stealth, searching, perception, melee, and 
  archery (bows/throws). These skills are derived from the character's 
  race, class, personality, stats, level and magical equipment. The 
  skills are described in more detail below (see [j]).
  
  Speed
  Speed is an incredibly important attribute. The speed system is 
  somewhat complicated; but basically, the more speed somebody has 
  (whether it's you or a monster), the more often they get a turn 
  compared to everybody else. If you are really slow, an enemy might 
  get four or five or six moves for every one move you get, which 
  obviously isn't ideal - but won't it be fun when you get more speed 
  and can turn the tables?
  
  Losing speed is very easy: just carry more items than your strength 
  comfortably allows. But to increase your speed you generally need 
  magic, either in the form of a spell or potion, or in the form of an 
  enchanted piece of equipment (such as Boots of Speed). Potions of 
  Speed will serve the early player well, and you should use them 
  liberally against foes that seem too powerful otherwise (especially 
  quest monsters and level guardians!). As you dive deeper, you will 
  quickly find normal unenchanted speed insufficient; even with bags of 
  HP, you could still die from full health without getting a single 
  action if your opponent is too fast compared to you.
  
Statistics
Each character has six basic stats (strength, intelligence, wisdom, 
dexterity, constitution, and charisma) which modify the abilities of 
the character in a variety of ways. Every stat has a numerical value, 
ranging from a minimum of 3 to a tipping point at 18, and beyond that 
into a fractional range represented as 18/01 through 18/220; 18/220 is 
the maximal value, and generally displayed as 18/***. In this notation, 
18/10 is equivalent to what a new player might intuitively think of as 
19, 18/20 is equivalent to 20 etc.; but the switch in notations makes 
it clear that there is a tipping point at 18, beyond which sources of 
permanent stat gain work in a very different way.

As you play the game, your stats can be increased through magical 
means, as a reward for accomplishing a difficult task, or as a reward 
for gaining enough experience to advance to a key level. Eventually, 
your stats will reach their internal maximum value (or stat cap), which 
is a value between 18/70 and 18/130 and is randomly chosen at character 
birth. At this point, it will be up to your race, class and personality 
modifiers, magical equipment, and maybe other sources like a bizarre 
mutation, to boost your stats further up to the 18/*** limit.

Your primary stat (or spellcasting stat) determines your spell fail 
rates and the size of your mana pool, as well as how many spells you 
can learn if you are a book spellcaster. As a general rule, if your 
spellcasting stat falls to 7 or below, you run out of mana altogether.

Which stats are important varies from character to character, although 
practically everyone wants decent Strength and Intelligence, and 
Constitution becomes ever more valuable as the game progresses. Melee 
characters need Dexterity, and magic users require above all whichever 
stat is their spellcasting stat. Allocate your points accordingly!

  Strength (STR)
  Strength is critical to fighting effectively in melee combat and with 
  missile weapons. A high strength will improve the number of blows you 
  get with your melee weapon, increases the amount of damage done with 
  each hit, allows you to use heavier weapons without penalties and 
  slightly improves your accuracy. Strength is also useful for 
  tunnelling, bashing doors and simply for carrying heavy items without 
  being slowed down. Many melee classes, such as Maulers, Berserkers 
  and Weaponmasters, use Strength as their primary stat.

  Intelligence (INT)
  Intelligent characters are better at using magic devices, picking 
  locks and disarming traps. Intelligence also influences how quickly 
  characters learn from their experiences. Intelligence is a common 
  primary spellcasting stat for mage-like spellcasters.

  Wisdom (WIS)
  Wise characters have higher saving throws, giving them a better 
  chance to resist evil curses and paralysis. Wisdom also affects the 
  speed at which level feelings and object feelings appear. Wisdom is a 
  common spellcasting stat for priest-like classes.

  Dexterity (DEX)
  Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness. High dexterity 
  allows you to get more blows with weapons, thus greatly improving 
  your melee damage; it also improves your accuracy with any weapon, 
  and directly affects your AC by allowing you to dodge blows from 
  enemies. Dexterity is also useful in picking locks, disarming traps, 
  and protecting yourself from the thieves that inhabit the dungeons. 
  Dexterity is the spellcasting stat for a number of classes, including 
  the "default"-selection Burglary Rogue.

  Constitution (CON)
  Constitution is a character's ability to resist damage to his body. 
  Characters with a high Constitution receive more hit points and 
  recover from wounds and stunning more rapidly. Blood-Knights use 
  constitution as their primary stat.

  Charisma (CHR)
  Charisma represents a character's personality and force of will. 
  Characters with a high Charisma receive more favorable pricing at 
  shops, and all charming effects work better with high charisma. 
  Additionally, charisma is used for determining player and monster 
  fear; players with low charisma are often frightened, sometimes even 
  to the point of paralysis (see [k])! Conversely, charismatic players 
  can more easily break the morale of their foes. A number of classes, 
  such as Bards and Sorcerers, use Charisma as their primary spell 
  stat.

Skills
These attributes are generally based largely on your class, but can 
also be affected by your race, personality, stats and equipment. They 
often, but not always, go up with character level:

  Melee
  Melee skill is very simply a baseline for your accuracy in melee 
  combat (whether armed or unarmed). Strength and Dexterity boost this 
  skill, and you can further boost your accuracy through combat bonuses 
  on equipment. This skill increases with character level, except for 
  Sorcerers who are uniformly poor at melee.

  Archery
  This skill generally applies both to using ranged missile weapons and 
  to throwing projectiles, although in some cases separate calculations 
  might apply. Archery skill, like melee skill, is a baseline for your 
  accuracy; but exceptionally high Archery skill can also improve your 
  shooting speed and reduce the chance your ammunition breaks on 
  impact. Strength and Dexterity can boost your Archery, although this 
  boost only affects your accuracy and not the additional bonuses 
  noted. Like Melee skill, Archery improves naturally with character 
  level for all characters except Sorcerers.

  Saving Throw
  Saving Throw is the ability of your character to resist the effects 
  of spells cast on you by a monster. Most commonly, Saving Throw is 
  applied when the spell involves some kind of curse, either against 
  you or against your equipment. Saving Throw also helps you against 
  paralysis, though having Free Action is also needed for that! This 
  skill increases naturally with level - but you'll also be running 
  into nastier curses at high levels... Saving Throw is affected by 
  Wisdom.

  Stealth
  The ability to move silently is very useful. Characters with good 
  stealth can usually surprise their opponents, gaining the first blow 
  (or the opportunity to avoid a fight entirely), while characters with 
  low Stealth will be mobbed by enemies as everybody nearby wakes up. 
  Stealth generally does not improve with character level, and depends 
  only on your race, class, personality and equipment. New players 
  should value Stealth highly; the less experience you have handling 
  monster mobs, the less you can afford to invite them.

  Disarming
  Disarming is the ability to remove traps (safely), and includes 
  picking locks on chests and doors. A successful disarming will gain 
  the character some experience. A trap must be found before it can be 
  disarmed. Dexterity and Intelligence both affect Disarming skill, and 
  this skill also increases with character level.

  Magic Device Skill
  Using magical devices requires experience and knowledge, and natural 
  spellcasters such as mages tend to be much better at it than melee 
  classes. Device Skill is the most important of all skills, especially 
  in the late game; and although your class accounts for the bulk of 
  your device skill, the bonuses from race and personality are also 
  important simply because the skill itself is so important. Device 
  Skill is affected by Intelligence, and improves with character level.

  Perception (Searching Frequency)
  Searching (Searching Ability)
  These two skills are very closely related. Both help you notice 
  secret doors, floor traps, and traps on chests; Searching helps when 
  you are actively looking for them, and Perception might allow you to 
  notice them without actively looking. Searching also improves your 
  ability to see invisible monsters. These skills are based on your 
  race, class, personality and equipment, and generally do not improve 
  with character level.

Additional Abilities

Like stats and skills, these additional abilities help your character 
survive and get about. They can be affected by your race, class or 
personality, but only in exceptional cases (apart from Infravision, 
which is based mostly on your race). As such, these abilities are not 
as prominently displayed during the birth process, but they do make a 
difference during the game!

  Regeneration
  Regeneration determines how quickly you recover lost hit points and 
  mana. It is generally affected only by magical effects or equipment, 
  not by your race or class, though there are some exceptions (for 
  example, Amberites, Beornings, Werewolves and Einherjar regenerate 
  exceptionally fast). If you get hit with an evil curse that affects 
  your regeneration, or suffer hideous mutations that slow it down, the 
  pain will hit very quickly...

  Infravision
  Infravision is the ability to see heat sources. Since dungeons tend 
  to be cool or cold, infravision will not allow your character to see 
  walls or objects, but does allow you to detect warm-blooded creatures 
  up to a certain distance. Infravision works equally well with or 
  without a light source. Many monsters are cold-blooded and so not 
  detected by infravision, but especially in the early game (when 
  warm-blooded monsters are more common and See Invisible is often 
  lacking) infravision can make a difference. Most non-human races have 
  some innate infravision, and any race can gain infravision from 
  magical equipment.

  Digging
  This ability allows you to mine for treasures and create new tunnels 
  more effectively. It is affected by Strength, by magical equipment, 
  by digging implements such as picks and shovels, and by the weight of 
  your weapon/digging implement (heavy weapons are better for digging). 
  Digging is not usually affected by race, class or personality, 
  although again there are some exceptions; Lawyers, for instance, are 
  very good at digging.

Birth Options
During character generation you may press '=' at any time to access the 
birth options, unless you selected Beginner Mode which assigns 
mostly-default options to you. Popular birth options include 
coffee-break mode, which accelerates the game (but removes the 
wilderness); no selling, which increases gold drops in the dungeon but 
prevents the player from selling items for money; and no scrambling, 
which removes the controversial Stat Scrambling mechanic from the game 
and replaces it with an incantation of the evil but less controversial 
Baby Foul Curse. There are dozens of other birth options as well, some 
likewise popular, others very niche; see [l] for a detailed explanation 
of each.

Reference

Beginner Mode  Designed for new players, this mode greatly restricts 
               the races and classes available to you. In addition, it 
               removes Personality from the birth process, 
               automatically assigning you the Ordinary personality 
               (which has absolutely no gameplay effects). Birth option 
               selection (=) is also disabled to speed up character 
               creation; you will play with automatically assigned, 
               mostly default options. The effective_speed display 
               option ("Show speeds as energy multipliers") is turned 
               on by default in Beginner Mode, as it makes the meanings 
               of speed values clearer to new players. Finally, this 
               option forces the player to play in coffee-break mode, 
               which accelerates the game, eliminates the wilderness 
               and uses the special Lite-Town as the only town. Since 
               up staircases don't generate in coffee-break mode, 
               beginners start with extra scrolls of Word of Recall so 
               they (hopefully) won't get stuck in the dungeon.

Normal Mode    This is the standard way to play: the Full Monty, so to 
               speak. All races and classes are available to choose 
               from, even ones that might be under development and not 
               yet fully tested. The player has access to both the 
               Birth Options and the Personality subsystem. Here you 
               may (if you wish!) play with a vast surface wilderness, 
               complete with numerous dungeons and towns to explore.

Monster Mode   This mode allows the player to play as a monster rather 
               than a normal character. There is no class to choose; 
               instead, the racial (and subracial) choices determine 
               the type of monster you play, and are effectively both 
               your race and your class. There are many options to 
               choose from, including some really zany ones! Most 
               monster forms evolve from weak forms to stronger ones 
               (e.g. from a Forest Troll to a Fire Troll, and so 
               forth); and many forms have unique body types (e.g. a 
               Xorn has two full sets of arms, and can wield up to four 
               melee weapons). In addition, most monster races have a 
               boss who will drop a nifty artifact when slain. But the 
               goal of the game remains the same: kill the Serpent of 
               Chaos.

Quick Start    Once an existing character dies, you may create a new 
               one from the same savefile. If so, you receive this 
               extra option; choose quick start, and you get a new 
               character with exactly the same race, class, options, 
               and personality as your last character. Since it is 
               common to die early on, Quick Start can save you the 
               tedium of picking the same choices again and again.

Character Name During the birth process, you may change the name of 
               your character. This name will be used for your savefile 
               (unless you created this character inside an existing, 
               already named savefile) and any options and preferences 
               you may set. So choose your name carefully. Changing 
               your name, as you may imagine, is a complicated legal 
               process involving much paperwork (and a hefty fee). 
               Should you decide to change your name in the future, 
               inquire at Count Uldrik's castle and he will direct you 
               how to proceed.


Original : (??)
Updated  : (??)
Updated  : Zangband DevTeam
Updated  : Hengband 1.5.2
Updated  : PosChengband 1.0.0
Updated  : PosChengband 4.0.0
Updated  : PosChengband 5.0.3
Updated  : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice


