The Dungeons

Although the game contains an extensive world featuring multiple towns 
(most offering special town quests) as well as a large wilderness area, 
the bulk of your adventuring will take place in the dungeons. Symbols 
appearing on your screen will represent the dungeon's walls, floor, 
objects, features, and creatures lurking about. In order to direct your 
character through his adventure, you will enter single character 
commands (see [a]).

Symbols on Your Map

Symbols on your map can be broken down into three categories: Features 
of the dungeon such as walls, floor, doors, and traps; objects which 
can be picked up such as treasure, weapons, magical devices, etc; and 
creatures which may or may not move about the dungeon, but are mostly 
harmful to your character's well-being.

Some symbols are used to represent more than one type of entity, and 
some symbols are used to represent entities in more than one category. 
The "@" symbol (by default) is used to represent the character.

It is not necessary to memorize all of the symbols and their meanings. 
The "slash" command (/) will identify any character appearing on your 
map, and the l look command and the * targetting command can also be 
used to inspect the features you see. As you play a bit, the most 
common symbols soon become familiar.

See [b] for town and wilderness symbols and [c] for monster symbols. 
You can use user preference files or the % command to change symbols, 
although that is quite advanced, and new players who do take that path 
sometimes walk so deep into the forest of visuals that they forget to 
play the game :) Most players just keep the default symbols.

  Features that do not block line of sight
  .   Floor                       *   A mirror
  .   A trap (hidden)             ;   A glyph of warding
  ^   A trap (known)              ;   An explosive rune
  .   Dirt                        ;   Wet trout of punishment
  ~   Shallow water               *   Section of the Pattern
  ~   Deep water                  *   Section of the Pattern
  ~   Shallow lava                '   An open door
  ~   Deep lava                   '   A broken door
  <   A staircase up              '   An open glass door
  >   A staircase down            '   An open curtain
  <   A shaft up                  #   A dark pit
  >   A shaft down                ~   Shallow nukage pool
  >   Dungeon entrance            ~   Deep nukage pool


  Features that block line of sight
  #   A granite wall              #   A permanent wall
  %   A magma vein                #   A tree
  %   A quartz vein               #   A mountainside
  #   A secret door               +   A closed door
  #   A glass wall                '   A closed curtain
  *   Treasure in wall            :   A pile of rubble


Within the Dungeon

Once your character is adequately supplied with food, light, armor, 
weapons, and utility items, he is ready to enter the dungeon. Move on 
top of the > symbol and use the Down command (>).

Your character will enter a maze of interconnecting staircases and 
finally arrive somewhere on the first level of the dungeon. Each floor 
of the dungeon is fifty feet high (thus dungeon level 1 is sometimes 
called "50 ft"), and the explorable areas are surrounded by permanent, 
unbreachable rock walls that separate them from other dungeon levels at 
the same depth. The size of a dungeon level can vary, but they are 
always rectangular and sometimes quite large, several times larger than 
the screen.

In Beginner Mode and coffee-break mode, once you leave a level you 
cannot ever return there, simply because up-stairs do not exist and 
every dungeon level you enter will be deeper than the one before it. If 
these modes (and the ironman option) are not selected, you can return 
to levels you have left as long as you remain inside the dungeon; 
although many different dungeon levels co-exist at the same depth, 
taking the same staircase again will always lead you to the same level. 
But as soon as you leave the dungeon, the levels you explored are lost 
and you will never find them again; upon your return to the same depth 
you will discover a completely new level. You might, however, run again 
into some of the monsters you left behind!

In the dark depths of a dungeon, the need for sufficient illumination 
soon becomes apparent. Some rooms have already been lit by nature or 
magic, and need no further light; but most of the tunnels are pitch 
dark, so it is a good idea to carry your own portable light source 
around. If no light is present, the character will be unable to see. 
This will affect searching, picking locks, disarming traps, reading 
scrolls, casting spells, browsing books, seeing monsters, etc. So be 
very careful not to run out of light!

A character must wield a torch, lantern or some other lamp in order to 
supply his own light. Torches and lantern burn fuel as they are used, 
and once out of fuel, they stop supplying light. You will be warned as 
the light approaches this point. You may use the "Fuel" command ("F") 
to refuel your lantern (with flasks of oil) or your torch (with other 
torches), so it is a good idea to carry extra torches or flasks of oil, 
as appropriate. There are rumors of objects of exceptional power which 
glow with their own never-ending light.

Great treasures can be found in the dungeon, but your character must 
survive many horrible and challenging encounters to find the treasure 
lying about and take it safely back to the town to sell.

Objects in the Dungeon

The dungeons are full of objects just waiting to be picked up and used. 
How did they get there? Well, the main sources for useful items are all 
the foolish adventurers that proceeded into the dungeon before you. 
They get killed, and the helpful creatures scatter the various treasure 
throughout the dungeon. Most cursed items are placed there by the 
playful evil sorcerers, who enjoy a good joke when it gets you killed.

One item in particular will be discussed here. The scroll of "Word of 
Recall" can be found within the dungeon, or bought at the Temple and 
Alchemy Shop in towns. It acts in two manners, depending upon your 
current location. If read within the dungeon, it will teleport you back 
to the surface. In Beginner Mode, Word of Recall is the only way to 
return to the town once you have left it, since Beginner Mode activates 
coffee-break mode which disables all up-stairs. If read on the surface, 
Word of Recall will teleport you back down to your recall point in any 
dungeon of your choice that you have previously visited. This makes the 
scroll very useful for getting back to the deeper levels. Once the 
scroll has been read it takes a while for the spell to act, so don't 
expect it to save you in a crisis. Reading a second scroll before the 
first has had a chance to take effect will cancel both scrolls.

Your recall point in a dungeon is usually the deepest level you have 
reached in that dungeon, but can be optionally set to a more shallow 
level if you read Word of Recall on such a level. There are two reasons 
it might be convenient not to have your recall point at the deepest 
level. The first is if you are not truly comfortable yet at the deepest 
level you visited; maybe you even fell there by accident through a trap 
door. The second reason is that some dungeons are located close to 
towns, so setting a recall point near the surface provides convenient 
access to the town! This is often the fastest way to reach a town if 
you are in the wilderness.

A more complete description of objects is found elsewhere in the 
documentation (see [d]).

Mining

Much of the treasure within the dungeon can be found only by mining it 
out of the walls. Many rich strikes exist within each level, but must 
be found and mined. Quartz veins are the richest, yielding the most 
metals and gems, but magma veins will also have some treasures hidden 
within.

Mining is rather difficult without a pick or shovel, especially if your 
Strength is low. Picks and shovels give a bonus to your Digging 
ability, expressed as '(+2)', '(+3)' etc.; the higher the number, the 
better the digging ability of the tool. A pick or shovel may also give 
bonuses to your accuracy and damage, and can be used as a weapon.

Having found a vein of quartz or magma, the character may wield his 
pick or shovel and begin digging out a section with the T or + command. 
When that section is removed, you can move on to another section of the 
vein and begin the process again. Since granite rock is much harder to 
dig through, it is generally better to follow quartz and magma and 
avoid the granite, even if it stands in your path. At a certain point, 
it becomes more cumbersome to dig out treasure than to simply kill 
monsters and discover items in the dungeon to sell (and many players 
prefer to do this from the beginning). Nevertheless, treasure veins can 
be a wonderful source of easy money, especially early in the game.

Some vein sections are obviously promising even to the untrained eye 
(these are denoted on the map with the * symbol); but if your character 
has a scroll, staff, or spell of Treasure Location, you can easily 
locate the many further treasures likely to be hidden within the quartz 
and magma nearby. This makes mining much easier and more profitable.

A character with high strength and/or a heavy weapon does not need a 
shovel or a pick to dig. A number of enchanted weapons even give 
magical bonuses to your Digging ability, making them highly effective 
for digging through even the hardest rock. New players sometimes worry 
they might break or harm their valuable melee weapons trying to tunnel 
with them, but worry not, this will never happen! Some magical spells 
and devices have the power to turn any stone, even granite, into mud in 
a single turn; such spells and items make mining and digging faster and 
more convenient, and generally remove the need for more mundane digging 
tools.

Mining for treasure is not the only, or necessarily even the most 
common, reason you might wish to dig a tunnel. Digging new corridors to 
modify the terrain to your advantage is often a good idea when fighting 
dangerous monsters, and sometimes you will wish to access an area 
otherwise blocked off by walls or by monsters you would like to avoid. 
So it is always a good idea to carry something you can dig with, even 
if you are not planning on mining for treasure; but it does not always 
need to be a shovel or a pick.

Staircases and Shafts

Staircases are the manner in which you get deeper or climb out of the 
dungeon. The symbols for the up and down staircases are the same as the 
commands you need to type to use them: a "<" represents an up staircase 
and a ">" represents a down staircase. You must move your character 
over the staircase before you can use it. A shaft ("<" or ">") is 
basically a longer staircase; it will take you two levels up or down, 
instead of just one, except in a few special situations. Some levels 
might have no regular staircases, only shafts; in fact, in Beginner 
Mode, all staircases generate as shafts.

Each dungeon level has two or more down staircases, except for quest 
levels (which have none until the last quest monster on the level has 
been killed) and the levels at the bottom of a dungeon (which never 
have any downstairs because there's nowhere deeper to go!). All levels 
also have at least one up staircase, unless you are playing in Beginner 
Mode or coffee-break mode or have turned on the ironman_downward 
option. Sometimes these staircases can be tricky to find; you might 
have to go through some well-hidden secret doors, or dig through 
obstructions to get there, but you can always locate the stairs 
eventually if you look hard enough. Stairs, like permanent walls, and 
the doors into shops, cannot be destroyed by any means.

Secret Doors

The dungeon has many secret doors to confuse and demoralize adventurers 
foolish enough to enter. But with some luck, skill and concentration, 
you can locate these doors; use the s or S searching commands to look 
for a secret door. Secret doors sometimes hide rooms or corridors, or 
even entire sections of that level of the dungeon. Sometimes they 
simply hide small empty closets or a dead end. Secret doors always look 
like granite walls, never quartz or magma. See [e] for some tips on 
where secret doors might be found!

Characters with very low Searching skill may be completely unable to 
discover the secret doors, no matter how meticulously they search. This 
is generally only the case for Berserkers, who prefer to use their raw 
power to create their own openings in the walls.

If a door turns out to be stuck, it can be broken down by bashing it. 
This sometimes takes a while to work, especially if your Strength is 
low. Once a door is bashed open, it is forever useless and cannot be 
closed. Many monsters are very good at bashing down doors... Creatures 
in the dungeon will generally know the locations of secret doors and 
may use them, and can often be counted on to leave them open behind 
them when they pass through.

Floor Traps

Secret doors are not the only things in the dungeon that are not quite 
what they look like. Some floor tiles contain hidden traps, there to 
harm or inconvenience you should you blunder into them. A few are even 
trap doors, dropping you down to the next level just when it is least 
convenient. Traps can be detected by Searching, just as secret doors, 
or through magical means such as Scrolls of Trap Detection. (Since 
traps could be anywhere and dungeon levels are often large, the 
Searching option generally only makes sense if you have specific 
reasons to expect a trap nearby.) Most traps in FrogComposband are 
fairly benign, so it is not a big deal if you don't have any 
trap-detection items; you'll be inconvenienced occasionally, maybe 
suffer some item damage, but it will not cost you the game outright. 
The spookiest traps are very rare and only appear in the late game, 
when nearly all characters regularly use powerful magical detection 
methods that reveal not only traps but also secret doors and much more 
besides.

Known floor traps are indicated on the map with the ^ symbol. You can 
use the l look command or the * targetting command to inspect a trap 
more closely, telling you what kind of trap it is. You will quickly 
notice traps are color-coded; the dark-green trap of this example is 
one of four types of gas trap, and might briefly blind, poison, confuse 
or paralyze you.

You can use the D disarm command to attempt to eliminate a known trap, 
turning the square back into a regular floor tile. Disarming is not 
guaranteed to work, though, and you might trigger the trap again in a 
failed attempt... Usually, walking into a known trap automatically 
attempts to disarm the trap (unless you are blind or confused); but 
there are a few very rare situations where you might actually wish to 
deliberately trigger a trap without any attempt to disarm it. This can 
be accomplished with the - key.

Floor traps only affect you; monsters do not have to worry about 
triggering them. This may seem patently unfair, but no one ever said 
the forces of evil would give you a fair shake! A few classes, though, 
have the ability to turn the tables and set their own floor traps for 
monsters to walk into. Lawyers are notable for this, but the mightiest 
traps of all are set by Burglary rogues.

Level Feelings

Once you have been on a particular dungeon level for a while, you will 
receive a "level feeling" representing what your intuition tells you 
about the quality of objects and the difficulty of the monsters found 
on that level. You may check this message again at any time after 
receiving it by pressing Ctrl-F.

The actual "feeling" message is generated based on a number of factors. 
Things which increase the feeling level include the presence of unique 
monsters, out-of-depth monsters and objects, large monster groups, and 
unidentified artifacts and ego items (see [f]). A feeling is only 
indicative of the level at the time you received the feeling, although 
it may update later to reflect the presence of new monsters or items. 
Note that high level feelings do not cause dangerous monsters or 
quality loot; dangerous monsters and quality loot cause high feelings.

In general, the nastier the feeling message, the better (or nastier) 
the level. From least to most interesting, the messages are as follows:

     'What a boring place...'
     'This level looks reasonably safe.'
     'You don't like the look of this place.'
     'You feel your luck is turning...'
     'You feel nervous.'
     'You have a bad feeling...'
     'You have a very bad feeling...'
     'This level looks very dangerous.'
     'You nearly faint as horrible visions of death fill your mind!'

If you selected the Lucky personality or have otherwise acquired the 
"White Aura" good-luck mutation, the messages will appear in a more 
optimistic form:

     'What a boring place...'
     'This level can't be all bad...'
     'You like the look of this place...'
     'You feel your luck is turning...'
     'You feel strangely lucky...'
     'You have a good feeling...'
     'You have a very good feeling...'
     'You have an excellent feeling...'
     'You have a superb feeling about this level.'

There are also two other feeling messages to denote special things. If 
you have not yet been on a level long enough to develop a feeling when 
you press Ctrl-F, you will be given the prompt:

     'Looks like any other level.'

You may also occasionally be lucky enough to receive the following 
message:

     'You feel there is something special about this level.'

A special feeling means one of two things, there is either an 
undiscovered special item (artifact) on the level or your racial boss 
is on the level. Most player races do not even have a boss, so it's 
usually the former! As you get deeper on the dungeon, special feelings 
become increasingly common as you encounter more artifacts.

Thoroughly check the object list (]) if you think you have fully 
explored a level but have failed to find the promised artifact. Often, 
the artifact will be an item you already detected but forgot to 
identify. If you mysteriously lose the special feeling, the opposite 
might have happened - some very absent-minded players have been known 
to identify valuable artifacts without noticing...

Note that it is possible for a level to have more than one artifact, 
maybe even an entire treasure vault full of artifacts. So you should 
never leave a special level without fully exploring it unless you've 
lost that special feeling or your character's continued survival is in 
question.

Random Quests

Every character will encounter ten random quests in the dungeon of 
Angband (unless they die first). By default, each quest is to kill a 
certain out-of-depth unique monster, though you may change this to kill 
a certain number of a random type of monster with a birth option [g]. 
Be warned: unique monsters are generally powerful even at their native 
depths, so fighting them out of depth is especially difficult!

On random quest levels, no down staircases are generated until the last 
quest monster is killed, which means that you cannot continue further 
into the dungeon until you have completed your quest. When you kill the 
quest monster, the down staircase will be created and the monster will 
drop one or more bonus items of 'excellent' quality or above. This is 
true even of monsters who normally drop nothing at all.

The random quests in Angband will occur at random depths, so you won't 
be able to guess exactly when you might encounter one, although you are 
guaranteed to run into quests during all phases of the game and can 
therefore expect another quest to appear soon if you have gone a long 
time without seeing any.

Should a given quest prove too difficult for you, you may retreat to 
safety (recall to town, or take an up staircase) until you are more 
powerful. In Beginner Mode and coffee-break mode, this automatically 
fails the quest; outside these modes, the quest monster will patiently 
await your return unless you deliberately choose to fail the quest. To 
abandon the quest is to shame oneself, but it is better to know your 
own limits than to die (even with full honor) in a foolhardy attempt at 
completion. If you choose to fail a quest, your fame will be greatly 
diminished, but at least you are alive and can continue your descent 
deeper into the pits of Angband.

Fixed Quests

Several additional quests also appear in the dungeon that are always at 
the same depth for everybody and involve the same monsters. One of 
these you probably already know - kill the Serpent of Chaos on level 
100 of Angband! Another is to kill Oberon, King of Amber, on level 99 
of Angband; these two quests are assigned to you at birth, and must be 
completed to win the game.

Other such quests are received from towns; although town buildings 
generally offer town quests, occasionally you will get a dungeon quest 
instead. One such quest you should know about is Pest Control, also 
known as the Warg Quest - a quest to kill eight Wargs on level 5 of 
Warrens, or on level 5 of Angband if the wilderness is off (as is the 
case in Beginner Mode). Killing eight Wargs will give you quite a lot 
of experience, so completing this quest really speeds up the early 
game! Note, though, that you must request and complete the Thieves' 
Hideout town quest in Outpost before you can receive the Warg Quest.

Fixed dungeon quests obey the same rules as the random ones, except 
that for fixed quests received from a town the reward will be given to 
you by the quest-giver instead of being dropped by a monster; also, 
leaving the level of a fixed quest received from a town will fail the 
quest. The quests to kill the Serpent of Chaos and Oberon cannot be 
failed; you can leave them as many times as you wish, although in 
coffee-break mode (and especially instant-coffee mode) this is unwise 
and aventually makes them harder to complete.

Conquering Dungeons

If you are playing with the wilderness off (as is the case in Beginner 
Mode), the game only has one dungeon: Angband. But with wilderness on, 
there are dungeons all over the place - about thirty fixed ones, plus 
random one-level dungeons that occasionally appear in the wilderness. 
Most of these dungeons have their own monster theme and level 
generation rules, setting them apart from the others.

High-level dungeons often have a special entrance guardian: a dangerous 
monster who will try to prevent you from getting in. Nearly all fixed 
dungeons have a final guardian, or dungeon boss - a powerful unique you 
can rely on to appear on the last level of the dungeon (and never 
anywhere else). Kill the boss, and you conquer the dungeon and will 
receive a free stat-up as your reward. Many dungeon bosses also drop a 
valuable fixed item.

Dungeon bosses are not quest monsters, and there is no absolute need to 
kill any of them; you can win the game without conquering any dungeons 
besides Angband. Even apart from the rewards, though, there is a good 
reason to kill at least some of them - but we wouldn't want to spoil it 
for you :)

This source of extra stat-ups is not available in no-wilderness play. 
To compensate for this, completing a random Angband quest gives a 
stat-up if the wilderness is off.

See [h] for more details on wilderness dungeons.

Wilderness Dungeons and Where to Find Them

This is a full list of all non-random wilderness dungeons... or is it? 
Dungeons are ordered by shallowest depth; and to avoid spoilers (only 
the shallowest depth is visible on the overworld map) this is the only 
depth indicated.
  
    Warrens          Level 1   Accessed from Outpost.
    Angband          Level 1   Northeast of Morivant, must be conquered 
                               to win. Contains random quests.
    Hideout          Level 8   Accessed from Outpost.
    Icky Cave        Level 10  Accessed from Thalos.
    Tidal Cave       Level 15  South of Morivant.
    Orc Cave         Level 15  North of Outpost.
    Labyrinth        Level 20  West of Outpost.
    Camelot          Level 20  West of Outpost.
                               Often visited together with Labyrinth.
    Witch Wood       Level 25  Southeast of Morivant.
    Battlefield      Level 30  Southeast of Morivant.
                               Often visited together with Witch Wood.
    Lonely Mountain  Level 30  Mountains southwest of Morivant.
                               Access requires levitation.
    Chameleon Cave   Level 30  Southeast of Telmora.
    Giant's Hall     Level 30  Mountains southeast of Angband.
                               Access requires levitation.
    Eyrie            Level 40  Mountains west of Telmora.
                               Access requires levitation.
    Castle           Level 40  East of the road from Telmora to Angwil.
    Crystal Castle   Level 40  Northwest of Morivant.
                               Guarded by dangerous Ethereal Dragon.
    Anti-melee Cave  Level 40  North of Morivant.
    Anti-magic Cave  Level 40  East of Zul.
    Arena            Level 50  West of Zul.
    Graveyard        Level 50  East of Angwil.
    Volcano          Level 50  West of Outpost. Entrance in lava field.
    Numenor          Level 55  Deep sea north of Anambar.
    Dark Cave        Level 55  Northwest of Angwil.
    Dragon's Lair    Level 60  South of Angwil.
    Pyramidal Mound  Level 64  Northwest of Telmora, north of Eyrie.
    Mine             Level 75  Island northeast of Anambar.
    R'lyeh           Level 80  Deep sea northwest of the Dark Cave.
    Mount Olympus    Level 80  Island northwest of Thalos.
    
  --
  Original   : (??)
  Updated    : (??)
  Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
  Updated    : Hengband 1.0.11
  Updated    : PosChengband 4.0.0
  Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice
  
  
