Options and Effects

Most of the options are accessible through the = command, which 
provides an interface to the various sets of options available to the 
player.

In the descriptions below, each option is listed as the textual summary 
which is shown on the options screen, plus the internal name of the 
option in parenthesis, followed by a textual description of the option.

Note that the internal name of the option can be used in user pref 
files to force the option to a given setting (see [a] for more info).

Various concepts are mentioned in the descriptions below, including 
disturb (cancel any running, resting, or repeated commands, which are 
in progress), flush (forget any keypresses waiting in the keypress 
queue, including any macros in progress), and fresh (dump any pending 
output to the screen).

Birth options

The birth options can only be accessed while creating a new character 
(press = during character creation). There is no way to turn them off 
(or on) after the game has started!
  
  
  Easy Identify (easy_id)
  With this option enabled, all objects are automatically fully 
  identified on walkover, and items, spells and town services of 
  Identify/*Identify* become unnecessary.
  
  Easy Lore (easy_lore)
  With this option enabled, the player will be born with complete 
  knowledge of monster lore, including the various attacks and nasty 
  surprises that many monsters usually offer to the uninitiated. This 
  is a bit of a spoiler option, but is available for those who don't 
  enjoy learning each of the many monsters present in the game. Easy 
  Lore also renders a few aspects of the game non-functional or 
  pointless, including the ability to Probe monsters to learn about 
  them as you encounter them, and the Research Monster town service to 
  learn about monsters before you see them (for a price, of course).
  
  Easy monster health and damage information (easy_damage)
  Also known as "Fnord-mode", this option allows the player to see the 
  exact damage delivered by each attack, and to receive additional 
  information about monster health and debuffs through a percentage 
  display. Player health bars are also converted to use percentages. 
  This is a very powerful easy-mode, and using it gives a score 
  penalty.
  
  Allow spoilers (allow_spoilers)
  Enabling this option allows the player to view some spoiler files 
  in-game with the ^Z command.
  
  Use enhanced telepathy (power_tele)
  With this option off ("fuzzy telepathy"), telepathy only reveals the 
  "species" (default display character) of a monster; its color and 
  race are hidden. Turning on this option allows the player to see the 
  color and race of telepathically detected monsters the same way as 
  with normal sight.
  
  Allow easy teleportation to Thalos (easy_thalos)
  If this option is on, inns will start offering teleportation to the 
  town of Thalos as soon as at least one out of Anambar, Angwil, 
  Morivant or Telmora has been visited by the player. Since Thalos is 
  located on an island, travelling there by foot is very dangerous for 
  a low-level character, especially at night. This option makes it 
  possible to reach Thalos safely earlier in the game.
  
  Easy Labyrinth and no amnesia (never_forget)
  This option removes amnesia attacks from the game, and allows the 
  player to map the normally unmappable Labyrinth dungeon in the same 
  way as all other dungeons. (Turning this option on does not 
  necessarily make the game easier, since monsters who might normally 
  use the annoying but ultimately harmless Amnesia spell will instead 
  select one of their other, more dangerous spell options.)
  
  Always forget item lore between games (empty_lore)
  With this option off, a new game started by opening a dead 
  character's savefile inherits the dead character's ability to 
  recognize attributes on excellent items and artifacts. Turning this 
  option on empties this item lore, allowing savefile re-use without 
  meta-progression.
  
  Monsters learn from their mistakes (smart_learn)
  Allow monsters to learn which spell attacks you are resistant to, and 
  to use this information to choose the best spells.
  
  Monsters exploit player's weaknesses (smart_cheat)
  Allow monsters to know which spell attacks you are resistant to, and 
  to use this information to choose the best spells; essentially, this 
  option gives Easy Lore to the monsters.
  
  Play without a wilderness (no_wilderness)
  This option disables the wilderness, forcing you to play with a 
  single special town level. The only dungeon available will be 
  Angband. Turning this option on manually is not recommended; it is 
  intended to be used together with the Coffee-Break and Instant-Coffee 
  game speed settings, which activate it automatically.
  
  Stores are permanently closed (ironman_shops)
  This option closes all shops, forcing you to survive off what you 
  find in the dungeon. Your home will still function normally, and 
  additional town services remain available.
  
  Disable recall and use of up stairs (ironman_downward)
  With this option on, you are not allowed to climb upwards or (at 
  Normal game speed) recall home. All stairs are downstairs, and every 
  level-teleport will take you to a deeper level. (Coffee-Break Mode 
  and Instant-Coffee Mode activate this option automatically, but do 
  allow you to recall home.)
  
  Always create empty 'arena' levels (ironman_empty_levels)
  If this option is enabled, every dungeon level will be an open 
  'arena' level; these levels will be almost completely empty, apart 
  from monsters and the occasional room. See the empty_levels option 
  below.
  
  Nightmare mode(it isn't even remotely fair!) (ironman_nightmare)
  If this option is enabled, all monsters become unusually powerful and 
  fast. And there will be various unbelievable things happening in 
  various situations. Furthermore, at 12:00 every night, you will have 
  a real nightmare. You need to be crazy to turn this option on!
  
  Thrall mode (start in extreme danger) (thrall_mode)
  With this option enabled, you start the game on level 90 of R'lyeh 
  (or level 90 of Angband in no-wilderness mode) as a runaway slave of 
  the dungeon's demonic masters. With extreme care, you have managed to 
  steal a few useful items that might help you in your escape. But now 
  you've been noticed, everyone's on alert, and it is up to you to die, 
  escape - or fight your way through...
  
  Always generate very unusual rooms (wacky_rooms)
  If this option is enabled, every room becomes a vault (except in a 
  few dungeons with special generation rules), vaults are allowed to 
  generate extremely out-of-depth monsters and floor items, and 
  extremely small levels are made slightly larger (to accommodate the 
  vaults). This option is purposely game-unbalancing, and is intended 
  for experienced players who have found they actually like the game 
  unbalanced now and then.
  
  Monsters can only be damaged in melee (melee_challenge)
  With this option on, hostile monsters will be protected from any 
  damage except player melee damage and auras. Status effects and 
  genocide will apply normally. Monster infighting is limited, since 
  monsters cannot damage each other.
  
  Monsters cannot be damaged in melee (no_melee_challenge)
  With this option on, player melee is disabled; weapons can still be 
  wielded, but not used to attack a monster. This option has no effect 
  on monster infighting, including melee between two monsters. (Turning 
  on both Melee Challenge and No-Melee Challenge is probably not 
  recommended...)
  
  Enable virtues (enable_virtues)
  Turns on the virtue system. Virtues can help or hinder the player; 
  among other things, they affect spell fail rates, the strength of 
  many magical effects, and the friendliness of some monsters.
  
  Deeper wanted uniques give better rewards (no_wanted_points)
  With this option on, the reward for turning in a wanted corpse 
  depends on the unique's position on the list of all wanted uniques 
  (deeper uniques give better rewards); with the option off, the 
  rewards depend on the total number of wanted uniques turned in. 
  Turning the option off is not recommended if the reduce_uniques 
  option is on, since the best rewards would then be completely 
  inaccessible.
  
  Preserve artifacts (preserve_mode)
  With this option off, once a standard artifact is generated (either 
  on the dungeon floor or in a monster drop), it will never be 
  generated again during that game; if you miss the artifact, it is 
  gone forever. With the option on, undiscovered standard artifacts can 
  generate again on subsequent levels; this makes it safer to leave a 
  level before it has been completely explored. (Standard artifacts 
  that have been discovered and left behind will never generate again, 
  regardless of whether this option is off or on.)
  
  Allow friendly monsters (allow_friendly_monster)
  This option allows some monsters to generate as friendly. A few 
  monster races are friendly by default; turning virtues on allows 
  additional monsters of specific types to spawn friendly if the 
  player's virtues are appropriately aligned with their type.
  
  Allow monsters hostile to each other (allow_hostile_monster)
  If this option is on, monster infighting is disallowed except when 
  one of the monsters is a pet or friendly monster. With the option on, 
  infighting can also occur between hostile (or friendly) monsters of 
  opposite alignments.
  
  Allow player to summon/charm monsters (allow_pets)
  This option allows the player to summon pets or turn hostile monsters 
  into pets (see [b]). Turning this option off is generally not 
  recommended, and would make pet-based characters like Quylthulgs, 
  Beastmasters and Cavalry essentially unplayable.
  
  Random quests for unique monsters only (quest_unique)
  With this option turned on, the ten random quests in the Pits of 
  Angband will all require you to kill a unique monster. With the 
  option off, some of them (especially the early ones) may feature 
  groups of non-unique monsters instead, similarly to the fixed Warg 
  Quest.
  
  Randomize standard artifacts (random_artifacts)
  If this option is turned on, some percentage of standard artifacts 
  will be replaced wtih random ones. A small number of standard 
  artifacts (such as the Rings of Power) are fixed and cannot be 
  substituted. Note that additional random artifacts, which complement 
  rather than replace the standard set, can generate whether this 
  option is on or not.
  
  Never create artifacts (no_artifacts)
  If this option is turned on, no artifacts will ever generate. This 
  makes the game much more difficult.
  
  Never create non-jewelry ego items (no_egos)
  Turning this option on prevents non-jewelry ego items from generating 
  randomly. This makes the game much more difficult, although ego items 
  specified in quests can still generate.
  
  Disable selling but increase gold drops (no_selling)
  With this option on, the player cannot sell items for money (only 
  give them for free), and turning items into gold through Alchemy is 
  less effective; but gold drops in quests and dungeons are increased 
  to compensate. (Gold drops in the wilderness are not affected.)
  
  Reduce the number of uniques (randomly) (reduce_uniques)
  This option removes some percentage of uniques from the game. A few 
  uniques (mostly those who appear in either quests or the Thalos 
  arena) are fixed and will never be removed.
  
  Play with only one pantheon (single_pantheon)
  This option removes one of the game's two main monster pantheons 
  (Olympian or Egyptian) from the game, but also re-adds all members of 
  the remaining pantheon if they have been removed by the 
  reduce_uniques option. In wilderness mode, the dungeon associated 
  with the removed pantheon is also removed from the game. Which 
  pantheon remains can be either specified by the player or left to a 
  random decision.
  
  Level size (always_small_levels)
  This option allows you to select from a variety of different 
  level-size selection methods. See [c] for more details.
  
  Increase monster density on small levels (increase_density)
  This option switches to the old PosChengband 6.1.0 monster density 
  formula for small levels, increasing the number of monsters generated 
  on newly entered small levels.
  
  Allow small levels in all dungeons except Arena (no_big_dungeons)
  If this option is enabled, small levels can generate even in dungeons 
  that normally always generate maximum-sized levels. The exception is 
  Arena, which will still always generate large levels.
  
  Sometimes reshape very flat "pipe" levels (even_proportions)
  If this option is turned on, levels with a very high (6-to-1 or 
  higher) width-to-height ratio are sometimes re-shaped to have the 
  same total area but different proportions.
  
  Nexus attacks never teleport to another dungeon (no_chris)
  Turning on this option disables the "Chris effect" (a nexus attack 
  effect that teleports the player to another dungeon, potentially one 
  that's highly dangerous and was never previously visited by the 
  player). As a substitute for the Chris effect, the player's stats 
  will be scrambled; or if stat scrambling is also disabled, the Baby 
  Foul Curse (a less deadly version of the infamous Ancient Foul Curse) 
  will trigger. This option has no effect (or, rather, is effectively 
  always on) in no-wilderness mode, since no-wilderness mode only has 
  the one dungeon.
  
  Disallow stat scrambling from monster attacks (no_scrambling)
  Selecting this option disables stat scrambling, an effect that 
  permanently switches two of the player's six stats. Stat scrambling 
  can potentially set the player back a long way if a high key stat is 
  swapped with a low, less important stat. Attacks (and other effects) 
  that would normally trigger a scramble will instead trigger the Baby 
  Foul Curse, which is more dangerous in the short-term but doesn't 
  have the same long-term effects.
  
  Disallow permanent changes to player race (comp_mode)
  Disables all effects (except for monster evolution) that might 
  permanently change the player's race during the game. This option is 
  intended for use in competitions, and to ensure challenging builds 
  remain challenging. (It can also be used to ensure an easy build 
  remains easy, but who'd do that?!)
  
  
Input Options
  
  Rogue-like commands (rogue_like_commands)
  Activates the roguelike keyset, an alternative way of mapping 
  keystrokes to underlying game commands. The roguelike keyset is 
  recommended for players who lack a numpad on their keyboard (see [d] 
  for more information).
  
  Pick things up by default (always_pickup)
  Tells the game that walking onto an item should attempt to pick it 
  up. Otherwise, manually picking up an item requires you to use the g 
  command, or the - command while walking. Combined with 
  carry_query_flag, allows you to selectively pick up all items which 
  you step on. This option disables the autodestroyer functions of the 
  Mogaminator, so it's often used together with destroy_items for the 
  easy auto-destroyer, as well as leave_mogaminator if picking up 
  absolutely everything starts feeling like overkill.
  
  Substitute Walk for Run in macros (online_macros)
  If this option is turned on, all running macros will be interpreted 
  as either walking macros or direction macros, depending on what is 
  appropriate. This option compensates for the unusual default 
  preferences of angband.live, and is unnecessary in offline play. 
  (Turning Numlock off is another way to solve the problem on 
  angband.live; it is generally the preferable solution, but may 
  sometimes be inapplicable or introduce additional complications.)
  
  Activate quick messages (quick_messages)
  Allows the use of any keypress as a response to the -more- prompt, 
  and allows most keys to mean "no" in any "(y/n)" prompt.
  
  Enable command selection menu (command_menu)
  The command selection menu is a helpful tool for beginning players 
  (Beginner Mode activates it automatically). If this option is on, 
  pressing ENTER during the game displays a menu of available commands, 
  which the user may drill into with the arrow keys. This allows 
  discovering and learning the keypresses for specific actions without 
  constant reference to the in-game help:
  
    +----------------------------------------------------+
    |   Magic/Special         > Action                   |
    |   Item+----------------------------------------------------+
    |   Equi| > Rest(R)                 Disarm a trap(D)         |
    |   Info|   Search(s)               Look(l/x)                |
    |   Save|   Target(*)               Dig(T/^t)                |
    +-------|   Enter global map(<)     Go down stairs(>)        |
            |   Command pets(p)         Search mode ON/OFF(S/#)  |
            +----------------------------------------------------+
  
  
  Use old target by default (use_old_target)
  This option forces all commands which normally ask for a target or 
  direction to re-use the latest target, provided that one exists and 
  remains acceptable for the purpose. This option is often used 
  together with auto_target (see below).
  
  Automatically target nearest monster (auto_target)
  With this option enabled, all targeting prompts will automatically 
  target the closest monster. This option is best used together with 
  the use_old_target option; a valid old target will take priority over 
  automatic targeting, so in situations where the nearest monster is 
  not your desired target, you can simply specify another target up 
  front.
  
  Repeat obvious commands (always_repeat)
  Tells the game that when you attempt to open a door or chest, bash a 
  door, tunnel through walls, or disarm traps or chests, that you wish 
  to repeat the command 99 times (see [e]). Turning this option off is 
  not recommended, and would make the game very tedious without 
  providing any real advantages.
  
  Prompt for destruction of known worthless items (confirm_destroy)
  If this option is off, no confirmation will be asked if you attempt 
  to destroy an object which you know to be worthless. If this option 
  is on, the Destroy command always asks for confirmation.
  
  Confirm to wear/wield known cursed items (confirm_wear)
  This option prompts you if you attempt to wear or wield an item known 
  to be cursed, to make sure you are equipping it intentionally.
  
  Allow targetting pets (target_pet)
  If this option is off, monster-targetting prompts will not offer pets 
  as target options (a pet can still be targeted if necessary, by 
  switching into free-targetting mode). If this option is on, all 
  monsters including pets will be offered as target options.
  
  Automatically open doors (easy_open)
  Makes it easy for your character to open a door: simply by walking 
  into it! Also, the open command will automatically select the 
  direction if only one door is near you.
  
  Automatically disarm traps (easy_disarm)
  Makes it easy for your character to disarm a known trap: simply by 
  walking into it! Also, the disarm command will automatically select 
  the direction if only one known trap is near you.
  
  Ctrl-G automatically gets nearby ammo (auto_get_ammo)
  This option instructs the auto-get command (^G) to automatically 
  travel to and pick up any nearby, visible ammo inscribed with =g. 
  This option is most often used by archery characters, who regularly 
  have to pick up many projectiles after a fight. Compare 
  auto_get_objects below.
  
  Ctrl-G automatically gets nearby wanted objects (auto_get_objects)
  This option instructs the Auto-Get Objects command (^G) to 
  automatically travel to nearby visible objects which you have 
  registered to either pickup or destroy. This option subsumes (and 
  extends) the auto_get_ammo option since ammo inscribed with =g is 
  certainly registered for auto-pickup.
  
  Automatically detect traps while running (auto_detect_traps)
  With this option enabled, the game will attempt to automatically 
  detect traps whenever you run outside a trap-detected region. Use the 
  view_unsafe_grids to make trap detected regions more visually 
  obvious. For this option to work, you must be carrying a scroll, 
  staff or rod able to detect traps. The game will use the object for 
  you automatically, consuming a scroll or a single charge from an 
  appropriate device.
  
  Automatically map area while running (auto_map_area)
  With this option enabled, the game will attempt to automatically map 
  your surroundings whenever you run outside a previously mapped zone. 
  Unlike auto_detect_traps, there is no visual indication of regions 
  that are flagged as mapped versus those that are not. When you invoke 
  magic mapping, the game maps your surroundings, and it also sets a 
  flag on each tile in the area of effect. When your player runs from a 
  tile so flagged onto one not so flagged, then the game attempts to 
  automatically map for you by locating an appropriate scroll or device 
  and using it for you. Both this option and auto_detect_traps work 
  best if you always run when travelling about. When you enter a new 
  level, manually detect traps and map your surroundings. If you always 
  run when travelling, the game will automatically take care of the 
  detection tedium for the rest of the level.
  
  Use numpad keys as cursor keys in editor mode (numpad_as_cursorkey)
  If this option is on, numpad keys are interpreted as cursor-movement 
  keys rather than numbers while editing any text (such as Mogaminator 
  preferences or a macro action). If this option is off, numpad keys 
  are interpreted as adding numbers to the text.
  
  Retain backpack slot labels in other inventories (use_pack_slots)
  If this option is on, inventory items will have the same default 
  label keys in all object prompts; for example, if a scroll is the 
  ninth item in your backpack and accordingly labeled i) for the Show 
  Inventory command, then it will also be labeled i) for the Read 
  Scroll command, even if you have no other scrolls. If this option is 
  off, each object prompt recomputes the labels, counting the relevant 
  items only; the example scroll would still be i) for Show Inventory, 
  but a) in the Read Scroll prompt. Having the option off reduces the 
  risk of objects unexpectedly changing labels between successive calls 
  to a command; the scroll could only be bumped to b) by the addition 
  of another scroll, the appearance (or disappearance) of a potion or 
  spellbook would have no effect on its label. (Either way, the only 
  fully reliable way to ensure items retain their expected slots is to 
  inscribe them accordingly; see [f] for help.)
  
Map & Screen Options
  
  Center map on player while walking (center_player)
  With this option enabled, the map window automatically recenters on 
  you as you walk. Whether this is a good thing divides players; some 
  find it extremely disorienting, while others consider it natural. 
  Turning this option on can make the game noticeably slow on older 
  machines, but most modern computers are sufficiently fast for this to 
  not be an issue.
  
  Center map even while running (center_running)
  If this option is off, the game waits until the player is finished 
  running or travelling before it recenters the map. If this option is 
  on, the map always centers on the player after every step. This 
  option has no effect if the center_player option is not on.
  
  Use special colors for torch-lit grids (view_yellow_lite)
  If this option is enabled, visible floor or wall grids illuminated by 
  a torch or other moving light source will be drawn in yellow. Keeping 
  this option turned off may slightly improve game speed. This option 
  has no effect if both view_granite_lite and view_special_lite are 
  off.
  
  Use special colors for 'viewable' grids (view_bright_lite)
  If this option is enabled, known floor or wall grids not currently in 
  line of sight will be drawn in dark gray, allowing the player to 
  easily tell which parts of a room or corridor are in line of sight. 
  Turning this option off may slightly improve game speed. This option 
  has no effect if both view_granite_lite and view_special_lite are 
  off.
  
  Use special colors for wall grids (view_granite_lite)
  If this option is enabled, the view_yellow_lite and view_bright_lite 
  options are applied to wall grids; in addition, special dark coloring 
  is used for wall grids if the player is blinded. Keeping this option 
  turned off may slightly improve game speed. This option may produce 
  unexpected results if wall visuals have been modified by the player.
  
  Use special colors for floor grids (view_special_lite)
  If this option is enabled, the view_yellow_lite and view_bright_lite 
  options are applied to open floor grids; in addition, special dark 
  coloring is used for floor grids if the player is blinded. Turning 
  this option off may slightly improve game speed. This option may 
  produce unexpected results if floor visuals have been modified by the 
  player.
  
  Map remembers all perma-lit grids (view_perma_grids)
  Memorizes all permanently lit floor grids seen by the player. This 
  option allows you to keep track of which explored floor grids were 
  permanently lit, but does not distinguish between dark floor grids, 
  unexplored floor grids, and unknown grids. Turning off this option 
  allows the player to always know which lit floor grids are in line of 
  sight, but this is better accomplished by the "view_bright_lite" 
  option. Note that non-floor grids seen by the player are always 
  memorized, regardless of this setting.
  
  Map remembers all torch-lit grids (view_torch_grids)
  Memorizes all floor grids seen by the player. This option allows you 
  to keep track of which floor grids have been explored.
  
  Map marked by detect traps (view_unsafe_grids)
  If this option is on, all unmapped grids in areas where trap 
  detection spells have not been used will be marked x, providing a 
  visual indication of whether Detect Traps has been used in an area. 
  If this option is off, a green DTrap status indicator is used instead 
  for the same purpose. (Note that it is possible for undetected traps 
  to exist in detected areas, as traps can be created post-detection by 
  monster spells or by triggering another trap.)
  
  Fresh screen before automated input (fresh_before)
  This option forces the game to fresh the screen before every new 
  command. This will give you maximal information, but may slow down 
  the game somewhat. Note that this option is only useful when using 
  macros, resting, running/travelling, or repeating commands, since 
  output is always flushed when the game is waiting for a keypress from 
  the user.
  
  Fresh screen after processing monsters (fresh_after)
  This option forces the game to fresh the screen after not only every 
  player command, but also after every round of processing monsters or 
  objects. This will give you maximal information, but may slow down 
  the game somewhat, especially on slower machines; on faster machines 
  this option usually makes little difference either way.
  
  Fresh screen after every message (fresh_message)
  This option forces the game to fresh the screen after every message 
  displayed by the game. This will give you maximal information, but 
  may slow down the game somewhat.
  
  Hilite the player with the cursor (hilite_player)
  Places the visible cursor on the player. Note that only some machines 
  are able to *not* show the cursor; but on those machines, hiding the 
  cursor often speeds up the game and looks less ugly.
  
  Display actual path before shooting (display_path)
  If this option is enabled, targeting mode will continuously show the 
  projection path from you to the target point.
  
  Use square-based delay factors (square_delays)
  If this option is on, animation delays will be calculated by squaring 
  rather than cubing the base delay factor. This permits greater 
  fine-tuning of very short delays, at the cost of not allowing a 
  longer delay.
  
  
Text Display Options
  
  Plain object descriptions (plain_descriptions)
  If this option is on, object flavors are included in descriptions 
  only if the flavor remains unidentified; a Blue Potion, for example, 
  might be shown simply as a Potion of Speed after identification. If 
  this option is not on, flavors are always listed, and the identified 
  potion would be a Blue Potion of Speed.
  
  Always show list when choosing spells (always_show_list)
  No one actually wants this option off, so there is no need for any 
  details about what it does.
  
  Show dungeon level in feet (depth_in_feet)
  Displays the current depth in feet instead of levels; 50 feet 
  corresponds to one level.
  
  Show speeds as energy multipliers (effective_speed)
  Displays player and monster speeds as energy multipliers; this style 
  is somewhat ugly, but helps players understand what a given speed 
  actually means in terms of energy. This option is turned on by 
  default in Beginner Mode.
  
  Show equipment slot descriptions (describe_slots)
  Displays descriptions of the slots equipment objects are worn in, 
  such as "right hand", "left ring", "neck" or "feet".
  
  Show weights in object listings (show_weights)
  Displays the weights of objects in all object inventories, including 
  any subwindow displaying an inventory.
  
  Show discounts in object listings (show_discounts)
  Displays the discount of the object, if any, as part of its 
  inscription. Disabling this option won't remove the object's 
  discount; it will just no longer be displayed to the player.
  
  Show device power in object listings (if known) (show_power)
  Displays details about an object's power (like dam 158 or heal 250) 
  in inventories, allowing you to compare items at a glance.
  
  Show item graphics in object listings (show_item_graph)
  Displays graphical representations of items (/, (, etc.) in 
  inventories.
  
  Display 'equippy' chars (equippy_chars)
  Displays graphical representations of your equipment (/, (, etc.) in 
  the main screen sidebar.
  
  Display player hp bar (display_hp_bar)
  This option will display a status bar on the main screen that details 
  your current health. For example:
    @[*******--]
  
  Display player sp bar (display_sp_bar)
  This option will display a status bar on the main screen that details 
  your current mana. For example:
    ?[***------]
  
  Display detailed food status (display_food_bar)
  This option will display a status bar on the main screen that details 
  your current state of hunger. For example:
    ,[**-------]
  
  Display stats as decimals (decimal_stats)
  Displays stats above 18 as decimals (for example, 39.7 instead of 
  18/217). New players sometimes find this format more intuitive.
  
  Display roguelike movement keys as reminder (show_rogue_keys)
  Displays the movement keys of the roguelike keyset in the main screen 
  sidebar, provided that there is enough room for them to be displayed 
  and that the roguelike keyset is on. This option is intended for very 
  new players, or at least players new to the roguelike keyset, and is 
  on by default in Beginner Mode.
  
  Compress messages in savefiles (compress_savefile)
  Compress the savefile, by only saving the most recent messages 
  received by the player. This can cut the size of the savefile by a 
  drastic amount, but will result in the loss of message information.
  
  Describe extra object attributes by abbreviation (abbrev_extra)
  If this option is on, any extra resistances and other special 
  attributes on an object will be added to its description as a fake 
  inscription. "Extra attributes" are ones the object is not guaranteed 
  to have from its kind or ego type; for example, Boots of Levitation 
  might have an extra resistance to Shards, but the levitation itself 
  would not be an extra attribute since all Boots of Levitation have 
  it. See [g] for a list of abbreviations.
  
  Describe all object attributes by abbreviation (abbrev_all)
  If this option is on, all attributes on an object will be added to 
  its description as a fake inscription. See [h] for a list of 
  abbreviations.
  
  Show the experience needed for the next level (exp_need)
  If this option is on, the experience display in the main screen 
  sidebar displays the experience needed to reach the next character 
  level. If this option is off, the character's current total 
  experience is displayed instead.
  
  Ignore actions of out of sight monsters (ignore_unview)
  If this option is on, you will not receive messages when out-of-sight 
  monsters fight one another.
  
  Display distance in monster list (display_distance)
  If this option is on, the distance between a player and a monster 
  will be displayed when the monster is targeted; for example, "Rng 4" 
  for a monster 4 squares away. The distance will also be displayed in 
  the monster list if only one monster of that race is visible; with 
  the option off, the list instead displays the monster's coordinates 
  relative to the player.
  
  Player character depends on their race (display_race)
  If this option is on, the player's representation on the map depends 
  on their monster race; a player Quylthulg, for example, would be 
  represented by a Q. If the option is off, the player will always be @ 
  even in Monster Mode.
  
  Show object origins on examination (show_origins)
  With this option selected, the origins of an object (where you found 
  it, and who or what you got it from) are displayed when the object is 
  examined.
  
  Show time of discovery on examination (show_discovery)
  With this option enabled, the date of object discovery and the 
  player's character level at time of discovery are added to the 
  object's origins. (Also, with this option off, if a pile of objects 
  with different origins is formed, all information about the origins 
  is lost. With this option on, the details of the first object to be 
  discovered are applied to the whole pile instead.)
  
  Show origins in final character dumps (final_dump_origins)
  If this option is on, the origins of the player's equipment are 
  included in character dumps if the character is either dead or a 
  winner, but omitted otherwise. (Whether discovery details are 
  included with the origins depends on whether show_discovery is on or 
  not.)
  
  Show origins in all character dumps (always_dump_origins)
  If this option is on, the origins of the player's equipment are 
  always included in character dumps.
  
  Use 'x' for monsters that look like things (easy_mimics)
  If this option is enabled, monsters that are easily mistaken for 
  non-monsters (like mimics, cloakers, death swords and wall monsters) 
  will be displayed with the 'x' glyph instead of their native glyph. 
  (A few thing-like monsters do still retain their original glyphs; 
  these include death scythes, mushrooms and creeping coins.)
  
  Display stairs in the object list (list_stairs)
  If this option is enabled, the list of visible objects (accessible 
  in-game by pressing O or ]) will include stairs in its Interesting 
  Features section. (The inclusion of stairs in the object list can be 
  toggled in the list itself by pressing S, but this option determines 
  whether stairs are shown by default.)
  
  Include known future race/class powers in lists (show_future_powers)
  If this option is on, the U bonus-power command (O in the roguelike 
  keyset) will include known future powers in the list, and gray them 
  out. Known future powers are ones the player will gain access to at 
  higher levels, but is currently too low-level to use. Powers that 
  require evolution, mutations or other special developments besides 
  level gain will not be included.
  
  Include known future class spells in lists (show_future_spells)
  If this option is on, the m magic/mental-power command will include 
  known future class spells in the list, and gray them out. Known 
  future spells are ones the player will gain access to at higher 
  levels, but is currently too low-level to use. This option has no 
  effect on book spellcasters; book spell menus always include 
  high-level spells.
  
  Display skills as numbers in the character sheet (display_skill_num)
  If this option is on, the character sheet displays the player's 
  skills numerically in addition to the usual verbal description; 
  Superb may become Superb (82), for example. This format is familiar 
  to players of Composband, where the numerical display is always on.
  
  Show statistics before proceeding with a reforge (reforge_details)
  This option shows statistics about how good a reforge result is 
  likely to be (and why), gives warnings in case of reforges that look 
  particularly misguided, and allows you to cancel the reforge if the 
  statistics are not to your liking.
  
  Automatically make all power labels sticky (auto_sticky_labels)
  With this option on, all powers used through the U key (O in the 
  roguelike keyset) will be assigned a permanent and unchanging letter 
  slot, allowing reliable macros, keymaps and finger memory.
  
  
Game Play Options
  
  Merge inscriptions when stacking (stack_force_notes)
  Forces otherwise identical objects to merge, even if one has an empty 
  inscription and the other does not. The resulting stack keeps the 
  non-empty inscription.
  
  Merge discounts when stacking (stack_force_costs)
  Forces otherwise identical objects to merge, even if they have 
  different discounts. The resulting stack keeps the largest discount. 
  This option may cause you to lose "value", but will give you optimal 
  pack usage.
  
  Allow query option lists to loop to beginning (expand_list)
  If this option is turned on, several interfaces that allow cycling 
  between possibilities (the looking/targeting interface, the identify 
  symbol interface, and the monster-research interface) will wrap back 
  to the initial option after reaching the end. If this option is off, 
  these prompts will close after the end is reached.
  
  Expand the "listing" commands so that they "wrap" at the "edges" of 
  the appropriate list. This allows the "look" and "target" commands to 
  "cycle" through all appropriate grids forever, and the "identify 
  symbol" to browse through all of the monsters of a given type.
  
  Allow empty 'arena' levels (empty_levels)
  Normal dungeon levels consist mostly of rock; if this option is on, 
  empty 'arena' levels are sometimes generated which substitute empty 
  floor for the rock. These levels can be highly deadly due to the 
  dearth of hiding places and the open lines of sight, although rooms, 
  vaults and pits will still be surrounded by walls. Compare 
  ironman_empty_levels, which generates all levels as arena levels.
  
  Display dungeon boundaries as permanent walls (bound_walls_perm)
  If this option is set, boundaries of dungeon floors will explicitly 
  look like permanent walls. If the option is not set, boundary walls 
  will look like regular walls, but still behave as permanent walls.
  
  Leave last words when your character dies (last_words)
  Allows you to speak a few last words when your character dies. If 
  this option is not on, a simple "You die" message is displayed 
  instead.
  
  Allow use of debug/cheat options (allow_debug_opts)
  Enables use of the debug command (^A), wizard mode (^W) and cheat 
  options (C in the main options menu). Using any of these irrevocably 
  marks the character as a cheater; having the option off ensures they 
  cannot be triggered accidentally.
  
  
Disturbance Options
  
  Run past stairs (find_ignore_stairs)
  Toggles whether stairs are ignored while running.
  
  Run through open doors (find_ignore_doors)
  Toggles whether open doors are ignored while running.
  
  Run past buried treasure (find_ignore_veins)
  Toggles whether treasure veins are ignored while running.
  
  Run past known corners (find_cut)
  If this option is on, the player cuts sharply around known corners 
  while running. This will result in faster running, but increases the 
  chance of blundering into a lurking monster.
  
  Ignore identified items while travelling (travel_ignore_items)
  With this option on, all identified items (except some extremely 
  valuable objects, and objects that add to a stack of already carried 
  items) are ignored by the Mogaminator while travelling. With the 
  option off, the Mogaminator may try to pick up already identified 
  items walked over during the travel, which is sometimes good but 
  often disturbs the travel annoyingly.
  
  Check for user abort of automated input (check_abort)
  If this option is turned off, automatically handled commands such as 
  resting, running, travelling or repeated commands cannot be cancelled 
  or disturbed by the user. This is somewhat dangerous, but makes the 
  game more efficient on some systems.
  
  Flush input on various failures (flush_failure)
  This option forces the game to flush all pending input whenever 
  various "failures" occur, such as failure to cast a spell, failure to 
  use a wand, etc. This is very useful if you use macros which include 
  "directional" components with commands that can fail, since it will 
  prevent you from walking towards monsters when your spells fail.
  
  Give -more- prompts on device/spell failures (prompt_on_failure)
  This option forces a -more- prompt whenever an attempt to use a 
  device or cast a spell fails. This is useful if the player is in the 
  habit of pressing keys (e.g. to target the device) on the assumption 
  the device won't fail, which if unchecked can result in a potentially 
  costly lost turn when the device does fail.
  
  Flush input whenever disturbed (flush_disturb)
  This option forces the game to flush all pending input whenever the 
  character is disturbed. This is useful if you use macros which take 
  time, since it will prevent you from continuing your macro while 
  being attacked by a monster.
  
  Disturb whenever any monster moves (disturb_move)
  Disturbs the player when any visible monster moves, appears, or 
  disappears. This includes monsters visible through telepathy, which 
  is sometimes inconvenient if you wish to rest near such monsters.
  
  Disturb whenever high-level monster moves (disturb_high)
  Disturbs the player when any monster whose native level is higher 
  than the player's character level moves, appears, or disappears. This 
  includes monsters visible through telepathy.
  
  Disturb whenever viewable monster moves (disturb_near)
  Disturbs the player when any monster in line of sight moves, and when 
  any monster moves into or out of line of sight.
  
  Disturb when visible pets move (disturb_pets)
  If this option is on, the same disturbance rules are applied to all 
  monsters, regardless of whether they are friendly or hostile. If this 
  option is not on, moves by pets or friendly monsters never disturb.
  
  Disturb whenever map panel changes (disturb_panel)
  This option causes you to be disturbed by the map scrolling, as 
  happens when you get close to the edge of the screen.
  
  Disturb whenever player state changes (disturb_state)
  This option causes you to be disturbed whenever the player state 
  changes, including changes to hunger level, temporary buffs or status 
  effects running out, etc.
  
  Disturb whenever boring things happen (disturb_minor)
  This option causes you to be disturbed by various minor things, 
  including monsters bashing down doors, new inventory object feelings, 
  and beginning to run out of fuel.
  
  Never disturb when a town monster moves (town_no_disturb)
  If this option is on, non-attacking moves by monsters native to towns 
  (such as mercenaries, drunks or street urchins) will never disturb 
  you.
  
  Audible bell (on errors, etc.) (ring_bell)
  Attempts to make a bell noise when various errors occur. The bell may 
  not work on some systems.
  
  Disturb when leaving trap-detected area (disturb_trap_detect)
  This option causes you to be disturbed when you move out of a 
  trap-detected area.
  
  Alert when leaving trap-detected area (alert_trap_detect)
  This option alerts you with a message when you move out of a 
  trap-detected area.
  
  Alert when carried device is destroyed or stolen (alert_device_gone)
  This option forces a -more- prompt whenever any wand, rod or staff in 
  your inventory is destroyed or stolen.
  
  Alert when inscribed item is destroyed or stolen (alert_insc_gone)
  This option forces a -more- prompt whenever any inscribed item in 
  your inventory is destroyed or stolen.
  
  Alert on killing wanted uniques (alert_wanted_kill)
  This option forces a -more- prompt when a unique with a price on its 
  head is killed.
  
  Alert on dangerously high poison counter (alert_poison)
  This option alerts you with a message before your move if your poison 
  counter exceeds your current HP, 80% of your maximum HP, or 499 
  points, whichever is lowest. (Subsequent warnings for the same 
  instance of poisoning will be displayed only if you are at immediate 
  risk of dying from poison.)
  
  
Easy Auto-Destroyer Options
  
  Use easy auto-destroyer (destroy_items)
  This option turns the Easy Destroyer on and off. If enabled, the Easy 
  Destroyer will destroy all objects unless the object is protected by 
  one or more of the leave_* options discussed below.
  
    Note: The Easy Auto-Destroyer is a simpler version of 
    the full-featured Mogaminator discussed at [i]. It is 
    designed for those who feel the full version is too 
    complicated to use. However, you really should only use 
    one or the other; if you are using the Mogaminator, 
    then you should not also enable the Easy Destroyer, 
    unless you have turned the always_pickup option on.
  
  Apply auto-destroy on sensing an item (destroy_feeling)
  If this option is turned on, both the Mogaminator and the Easy 
  Destroyer will take actions whenever the player senses the quality of 
  an object (i.e., whenever pseudo-ID kicks in).
  
  Apply auto-destroy on identifying an item (destroy_identify)
  If this option is turned on, both the Mogaminator and the Easy 
  Destroyer will take actions whenever the player identifies an object 
  with a spell or magical device. Identifying objects with a town 
  service does not trigger auto-destruction.
  
  List the rule used when applying the Mogaminator (destroy_debug)
  This is a debugging option for the Mogaminator. If this option is 
  enabled, the rule applied when the Mogaminator does something is 
  reported in a message; for example:
    You have 26 charges remaining. (AutoID:~?unidentified rods) You see a 
    Rod: Frost Ball (1/3 charges). (Destroy:(!rods:frost ball$)
    Auto-destroying.
  
  In addition, the matching rule will be displayed when an object is 
  inspected, for example:
    a Law Book [Attractions of Law]                               3.0 lbs 
      You can't remember ever not having it.
      Score: 100                                            
      Autopick: ~first realm's first spellbooks#@ma!k                           
  
  Never apply the Mogaminator (no_mogaminator)
  This option deactivates the Mogaminator. (It is redundant if the 
  Mogaminator was never activated in the first place.)
  
  Leave items the Mogaminator wants to destroy (leave_mogaminator)
  With this option on, the Mogaminator never destroys items (the easy 
  auto-destroyer can still destroy items), but items the Mogaminator 
  wants to destroy are not automatically picked up on walkover even 
  with the always_pickup option on. 
  
  Allow manual pickup before applying auto-pickup (delay_autopick)
  With this option on, any command that allows you to pick up items 
  manually will give the manual pickup priority over auto-pickup. (With 
  the option off, this only happens if you are picking up items from 
  the square you were already on.)
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves known worthy items (leave_worth)
  This option protects known objects that can be sold in stores from 
  auto-destruction by the Easy Destroyer.
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves weapons and armour (leave_equip)
  This option protects all weapons and armour from auto-destruction by 
  the Easy Destroyer.
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves closed chests (leave_chest)
  This option protects all chests which have not yet been opened from 
  auto-destruction by the Easy Destroyer.
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves wanted corpses (leave_wanted)
  This option protects corpses of monsters wanted at a bounty office 
  from auto-destruction by the Easy Destroyer.
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves corpses and skeletons (leave_corpse)
  This option protects all corpses and skeletons from auto-destruction 
  by the Easy Destroyer.
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves junk (leave_junk)
  This option protects all junk items, such as Broken Sticks or Shards 
  of Pottery, from auto-destruction by the Easy Destroyer. This can be 
  helpful on a class like Archer, although the leave_special option 
  also covers such special cases.
  
  Auto-destroyer leaves items your race/class needs (leave_special)
  This option protects specific items which are normally worthless, but 
  very important for specific classes or races. These include bones for 
  Archers, ego light sources of darkness for Ninjas, Wands of Heal 
  Monster for Beastmasters and Cavalry, humanoid corpses for Balrogs, 
  and other items with similar niche uses.
  
Base Delay Factor

The delay_factor value, if non-zero, is used to slow down the game, 
which is useful to allow you to observe the animations of bolt, beam, 
and ball attacks. The actual delay is equal to the delay factor cubed, 
in milliseconds, unless the square_delays option has been turned on.

Hitpoint Warning

The hitpoint_warn value, if non-zero, is the percentage of maximal HP 
at which the player receives a low hitpoint warning. It is also used as 
the cut-off for displaying both hitpoints and mana in red.

Autosave Options

These settings determine when the game is automatically saved. An 
automatic save can help salvage progress in case of a power outage or 
other catastrophic crash:
  
  Autosave when entering new levels (autosave_l)
  If this option is set, the program will attempt to save your 
  character every time before creating a new dungeon level.
  
  Timed autosave (autosave_t)
  If this option is set, the program will attempt to save your 
  character every n game turns, where n is the "frequency". To modify 
  the frequency, press F; this will increase the frequency to the next 
  category (and from 25000 to 0), the categories being every 50, 100, 
  250, 500, 1000, 2500, 5000, 10000 and 25000 turns. Note that the 
  frequency must be higher than 0, and "Timed autosave" set to "yes", 
  for timed autosaves to take place.
  
Window Flags

Some platforms support subwindows, which are additional, automatically 
updating terminals used to keep useful information on permanent display 
(see [j] for more information). These window flags can be used to 
specify what information each subwindow displays; the possible choices 
should be fairly obvious.
  
  Display inven/equip
  Displays the player inventory (and sometimes the equipment). Note 
  that you can toggle between Inventory and Equipment by pressing ^I.
  
  Display equip/inven
  Displays the player equipment (and sometimes the inventory). Note 
  that you can toggle between Inventory and Equipment by pressing ^I.
  
  Display Object List
  This option displays the results of the Object List command (O/]); 
  for example:
  
    There is 1 wanted object:
     ! a Potion of Resistance               S 17 E 29
  
    There are 4 other objects:
     | a Two-Handed Sword                   S 18 E 30
     \ a Lead-Filled Mace                   S 18 E 28
     ] a Pair of Metal Shod Boots           S 18 E 29
     / an Awl-Pike                          S 19 E 29
  
  Display Monster List
  This option displays the results of the Monster List command (Y/[); 
  for example:
  
    You are aware of 4 monsters, 4 are awake:
     t Aimless looking merchant (2 awake)
     t Agent of black market                N  9 W 54
     t Singing, happy drunk                 S 22 E 72
  
  Display messages
  Displays the most recent messages (compare the ^P command).
  
  Display overhead view
  Displays an overhead view of the entire dungeon; this can be somewhat 
  slow on older machines, and gives the same results as the M command.
  
  Display monster recall
  Displays a description of the monster most recently attacked, 
  targeted, or examined in some way.
  
  Display spell recall
  Displays the contents of the spellbook most recently used or browsed. 
  This window flag may be usefully combined with others, such as 
  monster recall.
  
  Display dungeon view
  Displays a copy of the map.
  
  Cheating Options
  
  Using the cheating options permanently marks your character as a 
  cheater; cheaters cannot score a real win, and will not get an entry 
  on the high-score list, even if they turn the cheating options off 
  later.
  
  Peek into object creation (cheat_peek)
  Cheaters never win. But they can peek at object creation.
  
  Peek into monster creation (cheat_hear)
  Cheaters never win. But they can peek at monster creation.
  
  Peek into dungeon creation (cheat_room)
  Cheaters never win. But they can peek at room creation.
  
  Peek into something else (cheat_xtra)
  Cheaters never win. But they can see debugging messages.
  
  Allow player to avoid death (cheat_live)
  Cheaters never win. But they can cheat death.
  
  Ask for saving death (cheat_save)
  Cheaters never win. But they can choose whether to save the 
  character's data when they die.
  

Original   : Ben Harrison
Updated    : Zangband 2.1.* by Topi Ylinen
Updated    : Zangband 2.2.0 through 2.2.6c by Robert Ruehlmann
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Hengband 1.5.2
Updated    : PosChengband 4.0.0
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.0.nougat
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.chocolate
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice


