Skillmasters

Using a point-based skill system, the Skillmaster allows you to design 
your own class. You receive 5 skill points to spend immediately upon 
birth, and will gain an additional point every 5 character levels, for 
a total of 15 points. You may spend these skill points to gain or 
improve various skills with the Gain command.

To be effective as a Skillmaster, you should have a plan as to which 
skills you will learn and when; your skill choices are permanent, and 
there are many more skills to learn than you could possibly hope to 
acquire with just 15 skill points, so make sure you won't be stuck with 
choices you regret. A bit of forethought is needed; this document 
should help.

Overview of the Various Skills

The available skills come in various kinds, or groups. You invest 
points in individual skills, not in groups, but the overall number of 
points for the corresponding group is sometimes also important. For 
example, the first group of skills is Melee; here, you may specialize 
in various melee-weapon classes or learn bare-handed combat (Martial 
Arts). The total number of points spent in this group determines your 
overall Melee skill (as shown on the Character Sheet) and even affects 
your STR and DEX. On the other hand, the number of points spent in the 
skill itself determines your proficiency with that particular class of 
weaponry, and also influences how many attacks per round you get. Each 
skill group is discussed in detail below.

The main skill groups are:

  Melee       Effectiveness in hand-to-hand combat
  Ranged      Effectiveness in ranged combat (archery and throws)
  Magic       Access to spell realms as an INT-based caster. Every 
              spell realm except Life is available.
  Prayer      Access to prayer realms as a WIS-based caster. Only good 
              and evil realms are available.
  Skills      Basic skills such as Devices, Stealth, Speed and Saving 
              Throw
  Techniques  Access to advanced or unusual talents that most players 
              lack. This includes some book-based talents, such as 
              Burglary and Kendo, as well as non-standard talents like 
              Riding and Dual Wielding.
  Abilities   For a single skill point, you can buy a power like Stone 
              Skin or an ability like Good Luck.

Proficiency

Before discussing each of the skill groups in detail, it helps to 
understand the proficiency system. It is explained in detail at [a], 
but the short version is: the game has several different proficiency 
systems, all of which are closely related; other classes' proficiency 
usually starts at a very low level, improves through use and practice, 
and is indicated through the five broad tiers [Un]skilled, [Be]ginner, 
[Sk]illed, [Ex]pert and [Ma]ster.

But Skillmasters are very different; they do not learn through use and 
practice. When Skillmasters spend a skill point, they instantly acquire 
proficiency; as an example (of very bad advice), a level 1 Skillmaster 
could spend all 5 points in Riding and instantly achieve Master-level 
proficiency. The same goes for weapons: spending points is the only way 
to gain proficiency (even the Weapon Versatility demigod talent is not 
available). Skillmasters are [Un]skilled in everything they haven't 
spent points in, and [Ma]ster in everything they have spent five points 
in, but the tiers in between vary a bit.

Melee Skills

Melee skills affect your skill in hand-to-hand combat. Each skill in 
this group improves your proficiency either with a single class of 
weapons (swords, polearms, hafted weapons, diggers) or in bare-handed 
fighting, and also affects how many blows you can get per round. To use 
any particular class of weaponry, you will need some skill. Thus, when 
investing in melee skills, you must choose whether to be really good 
with one or two weapon classes or decently good with all of them.

The total number of points in this group determines your basic Melee 
skill in the same way your class choice normally would. That is, you 
get a fixed amount of base Melee skill, and an extra amount that 
improves with level; warriors get plenty, mages not so much; but you, 
as a Skillmaster, can improve your melee whenever you choose simply by 
investing more points in various melee related skills. As a rough 
guide, consider the following tables:

  Melee Group                          Weapon Class
  Pts  Relative Skill                  Pts  Proficiency Blows
    0  Mage                              0  Unskilled   4.00
  1-2  Priest                            1  Beginner    5.00
  3-4  Ranger                            2  Skilled     5.25
  5-8  Paladin                           3  Expert      5.50
   9+  Warrior                           4  Master      5.75
                                         5  Master      6.00

Note that Melee and Magic are somewhat antithetical. Investing in Melee 
also improves your STR and DEX, but too many magic points will decrease 
your STR (and CON). Magic points also decrease the maximum number of 
blows displayed in the table above (by just 0.05 blows per point, but 
too much magic will make this effect noticeable). Also, Magic improves 
your INT and device skill, but too much Melee will have a slight 
negative effect on both of these. 

The individual melee skills are discussed next.

  Swords
  Swords (|) are the most common class of weaponry and include swords, 
  daggers, blades of chaos and all other weapons listed under swords in 
  the ~P proficiency menu. Swords and polearms are the most obvious 
  choices if you wish to specialize in a particular class of weaponry, 
  due to their commonness.

  Polearms
  Polearms (/) are the second-most common class of weaponry and include 
  tridents, spears, lances, axes and all other weapons listed under 
  polearms in the ~P proficiency menu. This is a good skill to invest 
  in if you are building a Riding skillmaster, since Lances and Heavy 
  Lances are perfectly suited for riding melee.

  Hafted (Blunt Weapons)
  Hafted weapons (\) are less common than swords or polearms, but 
  include the deadly Maces of Disruption and some exceptional artifacts 
  like the Staff of Asclepius (again, see ~P for the full list). Note 
  that prayer-based skillmasters have no weapon restrictions, and so 
  don't need hafted weapons like normal priests do; still, this group 
  is worth investing in if you want general access to weapon-based 
  melee, or just have faith that a great hafted weapon will drop.

  Diggers
  Yes, you can melee with Picks and Shovels if you want, but the 
  weapons in this class are incredibly uncommon when compared to the 
  three main groups; there are a couple of powerful end-game diggers, 
  but realistically this is an option for deliberate challenge runs.

  Martial Arts
  With this skill you may fight monsters using a special, bare-handed 
  combat technique. Skillmasters who invest a full 5 points in martial 
  arts will be almost as effective in combat as a monk; the only 
  difference is that your blows per round are marginally lower.
  
  A few cautions regarding this skill are in order, though. If you 
  fight bare-handed, you also get the monk armor weight restrictions, 
  but will not gain the monk speed boost or access to various postures. 
  (The armor restrictions stop applying if you switch back to 
  weapon-based melee.) In addition, martial arts will not work when 
  mounted, and Kendo techniques require a melee weapon to work.

Ranged Skills

Ranged skills include Archery and Throwing. As a group, the total 
number of points affects your Archery skill, as displayed on the 
Character Sheet; yet most players treat Archery and Throwing as 
mutually exclusive talents.

  Archery
  This skill improves your proficiency with all of Slings, Bows and 
  Crossbows (unlike Melee, this skill does not require you to 
  specialize in only one weapon type). With 2 or more points of 
  Archery, you begin to gain extra shots per round, as well as reduced 
  breakage odds for your missiles. You will never be quite as good as a 
  specialist Archer, but then specialist Archers don't get 10 skill 
  points to spend elsewhere... This skill also increases your stealth.

  Throwing
  This skill gives you the special power of Throw Weapon, which allows 
  you to use your leading melee weapon as a throwing weapon. The range 
  of a throw depends exclusively on your STR and the weight of the 
  weapon; the damage depends on the weapon (and any slays it might 
  have), your STR, and your Throwing skill. Investing enough points in 
  Throwing also improves your throwing speed.
  
  A thrown weapon will often return to you after striking a foe; with 
  enough skill, this return effect becomes very likely. You even have a 
  chance to catch the returning weapon with the same hand which threw 
  it, effectively re-equipping the weapon in a single, graceful, fluid 
  motion; this also becomes more likely with more skill, but depends on 
  your DEX as well. With a high enough DEX and full Throwing skill, you 
  can be almost certain to recover your weapon, fully equipped, after 
  each toss... however, you should always be prepared for an occasional 
  failure, no matter how skilled you are. So, carry a spare weapon!
  
  The damage from a thrown weapon can be formidable; as your skill 
  improves, so does the damage multiplier of the toss. Throwing 
  functions much like archery, except you are the shooter and supply 
  the damage multiplier through your skill; as with normal shooters, 
  the multiplier is scaled slightly by STR. And the weapon is the 
  projectile... Damage is calculated very similarly to archery, using 
  the damage dice of the weapon thrown, applying any slays, adding in 
  the damage bonus of the weapon and then multiplying everything 
  together to get a nice, tasty sum. You can view the details in the 
  Throwing section of your Character Sheet. Note, though, that most 
  off-weapon boosts will not apply to throwing; Rings of Archery and a 
  few other items can boost your accuracy, but that's pretty much it.

Magic Skills

Each skill in the Magic group grants access to a single spellbook 
realm. The realm will use INT as your spellcasting stat (usually this 
means INT will also determine the size of your mana pool, but that gets 
more complicated if you also learn Techniques or Prayer skills). With 
INT-based mana comes mage-like glove encumbrance; but if you invest at 
least 5 overall points in magic, you also gain the mage ability to 
benefit from cheap-spell and easy-spell items like Wizardstaves.

With just a single point in a given realm, you will be a poor caster; 
investing more points helps a Skillmaster even more than proficiency 
normally helps casters, in that it reduces not only the mana cost but 
also the level of the spell. Your minimum fail rates also go down with 
points invested; only a full 5-point investment allows 0% fail. 

See [b] for a list of the various spellbook realms. The Life realm is 
not available as a Magic skill (only as a Prayer skill); but apart from 
this you can learn all book realms, and can study as many different 
realms as you like. You do not need to learn individual spells; you can 
cast any spell in a studied realm, provided you have the book and your 
level is high enough.

Spending points in this group boosts your class Device skill, although 
not as much as direct investment in Skills/Devices. Your INT is also 
directly influenced by the total number of points in this group. Magic 
makes you squishy and bad at melee; too much magic will adversely 
affect your STR, CON and life rating multiplier and reduce your maximum 
blows per round. However, studying Craft magic boosts your melee a bit.

Prayer Skills

Prayer skills are like Magic skills in that each one grants access to a 
single spellbook realm; but Prayer realms use WIS, not INT, as the 
spellcasting stat. As with Magic, investing 5 points in the Prayer 
group lets you benefit from cheap-spell (Dm) and easy-spell (Es) items; 
but here you don't have to worry about glove encumbrance, unless you 
have invested at least equally in Magic.

The downside is that the selection of realms is more limited; only the 
good realms (Life/Crusade) and evil realms (Death/Daemon) are available 
through the Prayer group. Note that Crusade, Death and Daemon are also 
offered by Magic; you can learn them as either WIS-based Prayer realms 
or INT-based Magic realms, but not both.

Investing points in the Prayer group boosts your Saving Throw, though 
not as much as direct investment in Skills/Magic Resistance. Investment 
in Prayer skills also boosts your WIS; unlike Magic, this group does 
not come with any stat or melee penalties.

As mentioned above, Prayer skillmasters are not priests, so there are 
no weapon restrictions. You can gleefully slice and dice while piously 
enjoying Life prayers; if you wish, you can even freely mix good realms 
with evil realms.

Miscellaneous Skills

This group contains a number of skills that influence your character 
attributes. These skills each allow a maximum of 3 points to be 
invested. Invest here to flesh out your character design.

  Agility
  This skill directly improves your DEX and also determines your class 
  Disarming skill, as displayed on the Character Sheet. (By default, 
  the Skillmaster will disarm about as well as a priest.) The only 
  other skill that influences disarming is the Burglary technique 
  discussed below.

  Awareness
  This skill determines your class Searching and Perception skills, as 
  displayed on the Character Sheet. Since these are two of the least 
  important primary skills, Awareness also gives additional benefits to 
  compensate. These depend on the number of points invested: see 
  invisible and faster pseudo-ID (1); automatic pseudo-ID (2); and 
  finally a telepathic awareness of nearby monsters (3).

  Devices
  Skill with magic devices is extremely important for most players: the 
  difference between being able to reliably use a Staff of Healing and 
  not can be the difference between life and death. By default your 
  Device skill is primarily determined by the number of points spent in 
  the Magic group; a small positive influence is also granted for 
  Prayer skills as well as learning the Sorcery realm, but Melee points 
  have a small negative influence on device skills. If you never learn 
  any magic skills, it may be worth investing at least a point here, 
  depending on your race and personality.

  Health
  This skill directly improves your CON and also determines your class 
  base HP and life rating multiplier; by default Skillmasters have a 
  100% multiplier, but investment in Magic skills slightly reduces it. 
  If you want more hit points, or wish to undo the negative health 
  effects of too many magic skills, invest in this skill. 
  
  A quick note on HP distribution. Even independently of their higher 
  life rating multipliers, Warriors gain HP much faster than Mages; the 
  Mage HP progression is very late-game-heavy. Investing in Health (or 
  Melee) makes your HP progression more warrior-like, while investing 
  in Magic makes it more mage-like (investing in Archery or Prayers 
  encourages an in-between HP progression, which is also the default). 
  By the time you reach level 50 it all evens out, but in the mid-game 
  the progression makes quite a difference.

  Magic Resistance
  This skill increases your Saving Throw; a couple points here and some 
  Prayer investment, and you will be almost immune to evil curses.

  Speed
  Each point in this skill increases your speed by +2. Speed is very 
  important, especially in the early game; so if you plan to invest 
  here, you should probably do so quite early. (Too bad there are so 
  many other things you also want to invest in early...)

  Stealth
  This skill directly increases your Stealth. By default, Skillmasters 
  have absolutely terrible stealth... both Archery and Burglary 
  increase stealth a bit, but even if you are investing in one or both 
  of those, spending points here as well can still help. Each point 
  invested in this skill increases your stealth by +3; a single point 
  will make you as stealthy as a mage, while two points make you 
  slightly stealthier than a rogue. With three points you will be so 
  stealthy you often gain powerful sneak attacks on sleeping monsters.

Techniques

Techniques are speciality skills otherwise limited to one or two 
classes. For example, only Samurai can learn Kendo; and while Riding is 
more generally open, only Cavalry and Beastmasters are really good at 
it. But Skillmasters may also learn these techniques, often in powerful 
combination with other skills. You may invest up to five points in each 
technique in this group; the total number of points in this group has 
no gameplay effects.

  Burglary
  Normally restricted to the Rogue, Burglary ([c]) is a spellbook realm 
  that uses DEX as the primary stat. This realm functions much like the 
  normal realms in Magic and Prayer, and you need to invest a full five 
  points to match a rogue in burglary. Burglary skill also improves 
  your stealth and your disarming skills.

  Kendo
  Normally available only to Samurai, Kendo is a book-based technique 
  that enhances melee combat. Indeed, in order to use any Kendo 
  technique you must wield a melee weapon (so do not try to combine 
  this skill with Martial Arts). Kendo techniques have no fail rates.
  
  Learning this skill changes your mana to behave like that of the 
  Samurai: your max resting mana is very small and determined solely by 
  your WIS, but using the special Concentration class power temporarily 
  boosts your mana pool. Boosted mana decays rather quickly with each 
  turn, so you must time your concentration carefully before engaging 
  an enemy in battle, and then hurry to defeat your foe before your 
  mana runs out.
  
  Unlike real Samurai, Kendo skillmasters must carry the books around 
  to access the various techniques. Note that if you mix Kendo with 
  other spell realms, the Samurai mana mechanics have priority; this 
  can be convenient at times (you can regain mana quickly if you have 
  time to concentrate), but inconvenient at other times (Restore Mana 
  becomes less effective, and your mana pool even after concentration 
  is not all that large). As a final insult, Kendo mana mechanics block 
  all cheap-spell and easy-spell effects except realm stones. 
  
  Investment in Kendo should generally be combined with investment in 
  Melee. Kendo techniques make your attacks more powerful, but you 
  still need to hit monsters in order to benefit...

  Dual Wielding
  The Dual Wielding skill, pioneered by Miyamoto Musashi, allows 
  effective melee with two weapons at once. Investment in this skill 
  increases your dual-wielding proficiency; but like Kendo, this skill 
  should also be combined with Melee talents.

  Riding
  With this technique, you may ride your pets into battle. Each point 
  invested in Riding immediately increases your riding proficiency, 
  which affects your riding speed as well as your ability to ride more 
  powerful mounts. Without adequate skill you will be tossed 
  frequently, especially after taking a substantial amount of damage 
  (which of course is the least convenient time for it). Full riding 
  mastery requires five points in this skill, though you might be able 
  to get by with just four. Investment in Riding also makes you more 
  effective at using Capture Balls. Note that unarmed combat is not 
  possible while mounted. See [d] and [e] for more information.

Abilities

Finally, you may invest a single point in any of the following skills 
to gain a single power or talent. Unlike normal race and class powers, 
powers gained through these skills are available for immediate use 
without any mana cost and (usually) without any fail rate. For example, 
you may buy the power of Stone Skin on level one and use it right away. 
Stone Skin is also available as a spell in the Craft and Nature realms, 
but then you'd have to level up, find the right spellbooks and spend 
mana... Other powers in this group, such as Create Ammo or Eat Magic, 
have no such spellcasting alternative and are accessible only through 
the Abilities group.

Not all Abilities give powers; some grant a passive talent, such as 
Regeneration or Good Luck. Since Ability skills only cost a single 
point each, they are a cheap way to flesh out your character.

  Clear Mind
  This power regenerates a small amount of mana on each usage, helping 
  spellcasters recover mana more rapidly. To save your typing fingers, 
  the game automatically activates Clear Mind every turn when you rest.

  Create Ammo
  Normally restricted to Archers, this talent allows you to create 
  missiles from junk objects in the dungeon. You may create shots from 
  rubble, arrows from skeletons and broken sticks, and bolts from 
  skeletons; the quality of such ammo depends on your character level.

  Eat Magic
  This power allows you to drain mana from devices to replenish your 
  mana pool. Unlike the other powers in this group, Eat Magic can fail; 
  and even if you succeed in activating the power itself, you may still 
  fail to drain mana from the target device. You might even destroy the 
  device in the process! Nevertheless, Eat Magic can be useful for 
  endgame spellcasters; it directly competes with Clear Mind in the 
  mana-regaining stakes, offering a faster but more expensive and 
  unreliable alternative.

  Good Luck
  With this ability, you will have slightly better odds of finding 
  excellent items; even artifacts, especially rare ones, become easier 
  to find. Note that this ability does not stack with the Lucky aura.

  Loremastery
  This ability grants automatic, instantaneous identification of 
  objects as you step over them. Spend a point here to save an 
  inventory slot if you lack Identify spells or find them too slow.

  Massacre
  This power allows you to simultaneously attack each and every 
  adjacent monster with your normal melee attacks. If you find yourself 
  frequently surrounded by enemies, it helps if you can dispatch them 
  by eights instead of ones!

  Panic Hit
  A power familiar to thieves and ninjas: in a single turn, you attack 
  an adjacent enemy with your normal melee attacks and then teleport 
  away. This is very useful in situations where you'd like to teleport 
  anyway, as you get to land some additional damage in the process; but 
  watch out, as the teleport has a chance to fail. High Disarming skill 
  will improve your odds, but you can never fully rely on Panic Hit as 
  an escape.

  Regeneration
  This ability simply gives +150% to regeneration, allowing you to 
  recover both hit points and spell points much faster.

  Resistance
  This power grants temporary resistance to the base elements acid, 
  fire, cold, electricity and poison. Having no-cost resistance 
  available on demand helps protect both you and your inventory, and 
  reduces the need to get full 65% base resistance from your equipment.

  Rodeo
  This power, otherwise exclusive to Cavalry, allows you to attempt to 
  forcibly mount an unfriendly monster. If successful, you may tame 
  yourself a new mount to ride; but often such an attempt ends in utter 
  humiliation.

  Stone Skin
  This power grants temporary extra AC, making you harder to hit and 
  harder to damage in melee combat. The amount of protection increases 
  with your character level. This is a useful ability to have if you 
  plan to kill monsters in melee.



