Level Size Options

The size of FrogComposband levels varies from dungeon to dungeon, and 
from depth to depth, but the same basic system applies: the width of a 
level is always a multiple of 66 grids (no greater than 198), and the 
height of a level is always a multiple of 22 grids (no greater than 
66). Some dungeons are flagged big, meaning they normally always 
generate the largest possible levels (198x66), while Labyrinth, Warrens 
and Mine are marked smallest, meaning they always generate the smallest 
possible levels (66x22). Some dungeons (notably the main dungeon, 
Angband) obey coffee-break level generation, which means the average 
size of levels increases with depth; small levels are very frequently 
created, but by the time the player reaches the deep dungeons, these 
"small" levels start approaching big levels in size and are typically 
198x44 or 132x66. The remaining dungeons follow standard generation, 
which means there is a 1 in 5 chance of generating a smallish level 
(very small levels are excluded) and a 4 in 5 chance of generating a 
big 198x66 level.

Modifying the level size birth option allows you to choose from 10 
slightly different methods to generate level sizes, in addition to the 
normal method which follows the outline above. For clarity, this 
explanation uses 1x1 to refer to a 66x22 block; so 2x3, for example, 
means a level 132 squares wide and 66 squares high.  All options treat 
1x2 and 2x1 (or 2x3 and 3x2, etc.) equivalently, although the levels 
generated have different actual proportions (66x44/132x22). Apart from 
the "Huge" option, none of these options have any effect in the three 
"smallest" dungeons (which will always generate tiny levels) or in the 
Arena dungeon, which always generates huge levels. These options will 
have an effect in "big" dungeons other than Arena if and only if the 
no_big_dungeons option is enabled.

Huge
   This setting forces big 3x3 levels in all dungeons, even those that 
   would normally generate 1x1 levels.

Huge (respect tiny)
   This setting allows dungeons marked smallest to generate 1x1 levels 
   as normally, but forces all other levels to be 3x3.

Normal
   The default setting, detailed above.

Coffee-break level generation (allow big)
   With this setting on, dungeons that would normally follow standard 
   generation or would always generate big levels will instead follow 
   the coffee-break algorithm. Big levels will still be sometimes 
   created, since coffee-break level generation allows occasional big 
   levels, especially in the deep dungeon.

Coffee-break level generation (never big)
   This setting is the same as above, except that big levels are never 
   generated.

Medium
   With this setting on, all levels will take sizes between 1x2 and 
   2x3. A minimum size of 2x2 is applied in "big" dungeons. Depth has 
   no effect on level size.

Instant-coffee level generation (allow big)
   This setting determines level size based almost solely on depth, 
   generating tiny 1x1 levels in the early game and big 3x3 levels in 
   the late game. There is some randomness in level sizes, but less 
   than with most other settings. Calculation depth is boosted slightly 
   in big dungeons.

Instant-coffee level generation (never big)
   This setting is similar to above, but level sizes are slightly 
   smaller and max out at 2x3 instead of 3x3.

Small (classic)
   With this setting on, all levels will take sizes between 1x1 and 
   2x2/1x3, except in big dungeons where they're 2x2 or 2x3. (With 
   small levels in big dungeons not enabled, this is the "classic" 
   small-levels option from old versions of PosChengband.)

Small (coffee-style)
   This setting also generates level sizes between 1x1 and 2x2/1x3, but 
   instead of being completely random, level sizes are likely to fall 
   at the smaller end of that range at low depths, and the larger end 
   at high depths or in big dungeons.

Very small
   This setting mostly generates 1x2 levels, but allows 1x1 (except in 
   big dungeons) and occasionally allows 2x2/1x3 (especially in big 
   dungeons).

Extremely small
   This setting generates 1x2 levels in big dungeons, and either 1x2 or 
   1x1 in all other dungeons.

Tiny
   So you really like tiny levels! With this setting on, every level, 
   even in "big" dungeons, is guaranteed to be 1x1.


Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.chocolate


