Subwindows

In addition to the main game display terminal, which is always visible 
(and can show anything from dungeon maps to helpfiles), the game allows 
you to use up to seven subwindows; these are optional, additional 
display terminals used to keep important information permanently on the 
screen. Subwindows are numbered Term-1 through Term-7 (the main display 
is Term-0).

Why Subwindows Are Good

The most commonly used subwindows are monster list, object list, pack 
inventory and recent messages. The monster list, in particular, is very 
convenient - a common cause of death is not realizing that there was a 
dangerous monster nearby, and this is much less likely to happen with a 
monster list subwindow there to alert you.

The object list is likewise handy: it allows you to see at a glance if 
you're missing anything on the level, especially since the most 
valuable objects (and/or those wanted by the Mogaminator) will be 
displayed near the top. An object list subwindow will also help you 
quickly locate quest or dungeon entrances in towns and the wilderness.

Why Subwindows Are Bad

Space occupied by subwindows is space not occupied by the main display; 
subwindows force you to make compromises with either the number of rows 
and columns in the main display, the font size of the main display, or 
both. If you have bad eyesight or a smallish monitor, I recommend 
maximizing the font size by using no subwindows.

Having no subwindows also allows you to keep an iron focus on the main 
display, without the need to glance to the sides so often. Subwindows 
do provide useful information, but that information is also available 
through normal commands - i for the inventory, Y/[ for the monster 
list, O/] for the object list, ^P for recent messages - and these 
commands provide additional functionality (inspect item, travel to 
item, search for a message, etc.) not offered by subwindows.

Setting up subwindows on angband.live

Set the four values on the angband.live play page - subwindow right 
cols, subwindow right split, subwindow top rows and subwindow bottom 
rows - to your favorite settings. The standard example values are 
40/25/0/5 respectively. Start your character, then type =W during play 
to determine what each of the subwindows should display.

If the game crashes on start, you may have specified subwindows that 
occupy too much space; try lower values or a smaller font size. Note 
also that either "subwindow top rows" or "subwindow bottom rows" should 
be zero.

To play on angband.live with no subwindows, simply keep all four values 
at zero.

Setting up subwindows in offline play (Windows)

Select Window from the toolbar at the top and choose the Visibility 
option to toggle each of the seven subwindows on or off. Use the mouse 
to drag the newly activated subwindows to your favorite locations. Type 
=W during play to tell the game what each subwindow should display.

Setting up subwindows in offline play (Linux with curses)

Use the command line to specify subwindow size and placement as you 
launch the game. Here are a few examples:

$ ./frogcomposband -mgcu -uCrusher -- -right 57x26,*

This specifies a subwindow strip to the right of the main display that 
is 57 columns wide; this strip will contain two subwindows, one that is 
26 rows high and one that fills whatever space still remains.

$ ./frogcomposband -mgcu -uCrusher -- -right 57x26,* -bottom *x10

Specifies the same two subwindows as before plus a third subwindow 
(Term-3) below the main display, occupying 10 rows and (TOTAL-57) 
columns.

$ ./frogcomposband -mgcu -uCrusher -- -bottom *x10 -right 57x26,*

Same as above, except that the subwindow at the bottom is now Term-1 
and gets to occupy every column.

Type =W during play to determine what each subwindow displays.


--
Original   : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice


