You can view these tips at any time through the Help Menu.
You can choose which graphic setup to play with before opening a game through the "Setup" button.
You can change the scale of the Micro Map with a popup menu.
You can scroll the Micro Map by clicking and dragging it.
You can center the Main Window by Shift-clicking the Micro Map.
You can bring up the dungeon map by clicking in the Micro Map Window.
You can change the scale of the dungeon map with a popup menu.
You can scroll the dungeon map by clicking and dragging it.
You can hide the dungeon map by clicking in it.
You can assign sounds to over 130 events in the Sound Preferences.
You can assign multiple sounds to each event in the Sound Preferences.
You can assign a sound to any monster in the Assign Preferences.
You can customize game colors in the Color Preferences.
You can change the appearance of the Progress Window with a popup menu.
You can bring up the Character Window by clicking the character image in the Misc Window.
You can change the character's name in the Character Window.
You can toggle the depth display in the Main Window by clicking in it.
You can select an item to use by right-clicking in the Main Window when prompted.
You can select an item to use by double-clicking in the Inventory Window when prompted.
You can select an item to use by clicking in the Recall Window when prompted.
When an item is highlighted in the Inventory Window, its properties are displayed in the Recall Window.
Moving the cursor into the Recall Window causes the window to grow to show all of its content.
Double-clicking an item in the Store Window initiates a purchase.
You can bring up a popup menu of items to use by Control-right-clicking in the Main Window.
You can make the character run by Shift-clicking in the Main Window.
You can make the character run by right-clicking in the Main Window.
You can make the character tunnel by Control-clicking in the Main Window.
You can see the previous message by clicking in the Message Window.
You can bring up the Message History Window by double-clicking the Message Window.
You can repeat the last command by typing 'n'.
Most windows can be closed by typing ESCAPE.
Inscribing your ammo with =g causes it to automatically be picked up, regardless of any pickup options.
