People who (unknowingly or knowingly) contributed to Kangband:

Greg Wooledge - I borrowed some of Greg's ideas from GW-Angband and
  want to give proper aknowledgement. The following were taken from
  his source and added to Kangband: kobold race, poison and venom
  attributes for weapons, critical hits for rogues when monster asleep,
  monsters are not helpless when stunned, monster saving throw function,
  rod sorting hack, arrows/bolts good unless damaged, enchant weapon
  only goes to natural damage ammount, high level warriors fear resistance,
  customized monster health bar (I love this change!), 
  ===============
  Greg eliminated Globe of Invulnerability from his variant and reduce the
  blows table for mages.  I went for a slightly different way of balancing
  the mage class.  I kept GOI but imposed a penalty if they wield anything
  other than a dagger.  I felt this was more fair to the mage and matched
  the priest penalty (though more severe) for a non-class weapon.

  I also did not use his spell rewrite (Greg did a good job and I like it
  but I was trying for a Angband 3.0 generation and did not want what I
  thought was a little too radical of a change).

  I tried to document in the code every case where Greg's code was used.


Ben Harrison - Obviously, the variant would not exist if Ben had not kept
  Angband development.  Thanks for all your work and effort into this most
  amazing game.


Heino Vander Sanden - For the idea of implementing quests in Angband.


Glenn Vanzanden - for the code and idea of using the v_info.txt file to 
  create special levels which I then interpreted as quest levels.


Topi Ylinen - for his wonderful Zangband variant.  Have borrowed some ideas and vaults from his that fit into my overall scheme.  Even though I am not using a lot of his features - they are still pretty cool.  Anyone who hasn't tried Zangband should at least go through one game.


Debuggers from the net: Mark Howson, Joseph Dixon, Dave Howdan, Peter Knutsen, Darren, Mischa, and many others.  Sorry if I miss someone by name.  I mention these people as they have helped track down the source of a bug, provided ideas I used, or in general gave me a lot of feedback.

Special Note of thanks to one enthusiastic kangband player: Shamona who has
praised my simple creation with wild abandon on the newsgroup. (-:


The authors of Omega and ADOM from which I gained ideas.  Omega has a
  large town with class-specific buildings.  Both Omega and ADOM have quests.


Thanks to all those who compile Kangband for systems other than DOS.  I am
only able to create the DOS executable - so am very grateful for those who 
compile to let others play my work.


