
============================= Objects and Monsters =============================

     The mines of Angband are full of objects just waiting to be picked up and 
used.  The treasures of long-forgotten kingdoms, dragon's hordes, heirlooms, 
wizard's stashes, and the plunder from every age of the world unite with the 
scattered earthly possessions of all the foolish adventurers that died before 
you to offer unimaginable wealth for those bold enough to seize it.


Your inventory (backpack) and equipment (your person):
          You pick up objects by moving on top on them (if you have the 
      "auto_pickup" option on), or using the 'g'et command.  You may carry up to 
     23 different items or piles of items, and have 12 areas of your body where 
     wearable equipment may go.  If you somehow manage to stuff 24 items into 
     your pack, for example, by removing a helmet from your head while your pack 
     is full, then your pack will overflow and the most recently added item will 
     fall out and onto the ground.
          Carry too much weight, and you will begin to slow down, making it 
     easier for monsters to catch up to you.  The point at which your load thus 
     hinders you depends on your strength.

Your quiver:
          Your equipment includes a quiver, which may hold up to ten different 
     kinds of ammo.  Once placed in the quiver (using the wield command), ammo 
     normally sorts in the quiver slots just as it does in the packpack.  You may 
     lock ammo into a specific slot, and make shooting a lot more convenient, by 
     inscribing ammo with inscriptions similar to "@1", or "@f1".  Wherever you 
     store it, ammo still takes up space; for every 99 missiles (or fraction 
     thereof) that you place in the quiver slots, you lose an inventory slot.  
     Any such slots will be clearly marked.  Ammo on the floor will automatically 
     combine with similar items in the quiver, which makes cleaning up after a 
     big fight much easier.


Specific Types of Objects:
          Many objects found within the dungeon have special commands for their 
     use.  Wands must be Aimed, staves must be Used, scrolls must be Read, and 
     potions must be Quaffed.  You may, in general, not only use items in your 
     pack, but also items on the ground, if you are standing on top of them.

     Wands:
          In Oangband, known wands stack, combining their charges.  Such a stack 
          may be heavier, but can be recharged more safely and effectively.
     Staffs:
          Staffs do not combine their charges and only stack if they happen to 
          have the same number of charges (they take up plenty of space in your 
          backpack).  If stacked, the number of charges that they display is 
          prefixed by a quantity indicator (e.g. "(2x 13 charges)", which shows 
          that each of two staffs have 13 charges.  Although bulky, staffs often 
          have plenty of charges and recharge well.
     Rods:
          Rods always stack.  A stack of rods with at least one charging member 
          will show an appropriate inscription.  When zapped, a rod is "timed 
          out" for a given number of turns.  Each recharging rod in a stack 
          contributes to the stack's total recharge rate; if three out of five 
          rods are charging, the stack's total timeout period will decrease by 
          three per normal player turn.  
          Note:  In Oangband, rods are not invulnerable...

     Chests:
          Chests are difficult and dangerous to open, as they contain both traps 
     and locks, but the adventurer that opens one may be rewarded handsomely.

     Scroll of Word of Recall:
          The Scroll of Word of Recall deserves special mention.  Read in the 
     dungeon, it brings you back to the town.  Read in the town, it takes you 
     as deep in the dungeon as you have ever gone.  This spell takes a little 
     time to take effect, so don't expect it to save you in a crisis.  Should 
     you mistakenly read a Scroll of Word of Recall, you may cancel it by 
     reading another.

Object Inscriptions:
      Use the '{' and '}' keys to inscribe and uninscribe objects.  Inscriptions 
      go very well with keymaps and macros:  See the help file "macro.txt".

     To designate a main and backup weapon:
          Inscribe both with "@0" (or "@w0").  The 'X' command will replace 
          whatever melee weapon you are wielding with another so inscribed.  
          You may also inscribe these or other weapons with "@1", etc., and 
          wield weapons 0, 1, 2 and so on as desired.

     To prevent accidental use of an object with any command:
          Inscribe it with "!x", where 'x' is the letter you type to issue that 
          command.

     To be very paranoid about an object:
          Inscribe it with "!*".

     To set up a wand that is always aimed with the same set of keystrokes:
          Inscribe it with "@a#", or "@z#" in the roguelike keyset, replacing 
          the '#' with whatever digit you desire.  This allows you to set up 
          macros to, say, check for traps instantly.  Similar inscriptions make 
          archery very convenient, and make certain that spellbooks are always 
          accessed using the same keystrokes.

     To get notification when an object that recharges automatically is ready 
     for use:
          Inscribe it with "!!".

     Inscriptions for fun and profit:
          Try inscribing the first monster killed by a weapon, hidden object 
     abilities (once you discover them), and where you found the item or who 
     dropped it.

          The game also inscribes objects automatically.  Wands and staves which 
     are known to be empty will be inscribed with "empty".  Objects which have 
     been tried at least once but haven't been identified yet will be inscribed 
     with "tried".  Cursed objects are inscribed with "cursed".  Broken objects 
     may be inscribed with "broken".  Artifacts that you discovered by trying to 
     destroy them will be inscribed "special" or "terrible".  Items purchased at 
     a discount are so marked.  Some of these inscriptions will disappear when 
     the item is identified, and you may overwrite others.

Pseudo-ID:
          All adventurers are able to automatically gain information about many 
     equippable objects, but some classes are much more likely to learn about 
     objects this way than others.  Priests, and Mages, Rangers, Druids, and 
     Necromancers to a lesser extent, can tell whether an item is "good" (with 
     magical enhancements of some sort), or "cursed" (items with foul magics 
     that need at least a scroll of Remove Curse to take off).  Warriors, and 
     Rogues, Paladins, and Assassins to a lesser extent, can learn whether an 
     item is "terrible" (a item with perilous magics), "cursed", "average" (an 
     item with no magical bonuses or penalties), "good", "excellent" (an item 
     that grants special bonuses or abilities), or even "special" (an artifact).

Cursed Objects:
          Some objects, mainly armor and weapons, have had curses laid upon them 
     by joyful evil sorcerers who enjoy a good joke when it gets you killed.  
     These horrible objects will look like any other item, but will detract from 
     your character's stats or abilities if worn.  They will also be impossible 
     to remove until a remove curse is performed.  In fact some are so badly 
     cursed that even this will not work, and more potent methods are needed.
          If you wear or wield a cursed item, you will immediately feel deathly 
     cold, and the item will be marked "cursed".
          Shopkeepers will refuse to buy any item which is known to be cursed.



=== Monsters: Monster Memories, Stealth, and Player Ghosts ===

Your Monster Memory:
          When you see a monster for the first time, all you know are its 
     physical attributes and whatever information the monster description may 
     provide.  As you fight and kill monsters, use various attacks on them, 
     probe them with magic, and get killed by them, you learn more about their 
     strengths and weaknesses.

Stealth:
          Characters have a base chance to wake up monsters that increases as 
     player speed does (since a speedy character will perform more actions 
     making noise every time a monster gets to take its turn) and greatly 
     decreases as stealth improves.  This value can be modified:  combat and 
     bashing boors makes it more likely that monsters will awake (especially 
     those in line of sight), and resting makes it less likely.  The higher 
     your base stealth, the less extra noise you will make in combat.

Player Ghosts:
          Player ghosts vary from game to game depending on the name, sex, 
     race, and class of the adventurer or Angband/Oangband Hero whose bones 
     file was used during ghost creation.  Should your character die, informat-
     ion about him will often be added to a new bones file, inside the folder 
     /lib/bones, and a future game might bring him back from the dead...

