Sangband 0.9.9 beta 13 Macintosh port compilation
-------------------------------------------------

The Sangband Mac port is based on the [Vanilla] Angband port.  The source for
the Angband port is available at
<ftp://clockwork.dementia.org/angband/Macintosh/ext-mac-303.sit.bin>.  Thanks to
Ben Harrison, Keith Randall, Peter Ammon, Ron Anderson, pelpel and others.

All Mac-specific files for Sangband are all found in src/system.  These are:

A-mac-h.pch           -- Precompiled header source for CodeWarrior.
Angband.r             -- Sangband resource definitions.
main-crb.c            -- Main file for Carbon version.
main-mac.c            -- Main file for Classic version.
Sangband-mac.mcp.xml  -- Exported CodeWarrior 8 project file.

These are all text files.  (In fact, they're DOS text files, because most
non-DOS systems -- including most editors and compilers for the Mac -- can
tolerate DOS text files, or at least display them with superfluous characters at
the start or end of each line.)

All other files in src/system can be ignored for the Mac port.  All files in src
are significant, and are not Mac-specific.

If you're using CodeWarrior 8, you can import Sangband-mac.mcp.xml to create a
new Sangband project.  This new project should be stored in Sangband's root
directly (that is, at the same level as src and lib).  If you're not using
CodeWarrior, you can ignore A-mac-h.pch and and Sangband-mac.mcp.xml -- but
you're on your own after that.  I next plan on working on a version of Sangband
that will compile for Mac OS X just using command line tools.

All resource files have been stripped from this distribution, primarily to allow
the Mac-specific source to be distributed as text files with the rest of the
Sangband source.  If you prefer, you can take the resource files (those with the
.rsrc extension) from ext-mac-303.sit.bin described above and add them to
Sangband.  This will restore sound to Sangband.

-- 
Ken Dubuc <kdubuc@sympatico.ca>                          March 1, 2003
