PORTRALIS 0.3 COMPLETE ABILITIES GUIDE
-------------------------------------------

This guide deals about every abilities for every classes. This
is a must for everyone, as it contains the basic of all abilities
in the game. Each classes have 10 abilities. Each of them is
described, has information about how raising it helps, and also
offers some advice on how to use it properly.

Whenever an ability says "Can be resisted: Yes", this means that
the monsters affected may resist the ability. Generally, the standard
test opposes the player's ability level * 10 versus the monster's level
and mind stat. For example, the Warrior's "War Cry" ability can be
resisted by monsters. If the Warrior puts 5 points into War Cry, the
War Cry has a strength of 50. If he uses it against a level 1 Kobold,
the Kobold's mind is 5, and level is 1, so the Kobold's resistance
is 6. Then, a number is rolled between 1 and 50 for the player, and
between 1 and 6 for the Kobold. If the player rolls a number equal
or higher than the Kobold, the player succeeds. Otherwise, the Kobold
succeeds in resisting the ability.

WARRIOR
---------

1. Spin Attack(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Damage all enemies around you.
Damages: Normal attack damages(branded weapons are not counted)
Radius: 1
Type: Weapon's damages type.
Extra points: +20% to damages.

Spin attack does physical damages to enemies around you. It can be
useful is you are surrounded, and it's also a helpful ability to
defeat the physical returning bosses, as special physical attacks
such as this one or physical-type spells are not returned to you.
It can also become quite powerful should you decide to invest
some points into it.

2. Strength(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your strength by 10%
Extra points: +10% additional strength bonus

This passive ability adds some percentile bonus to your strength.
Higher strength will result in higher damages, and this ability
can allow you to have a lot of it.

3. Increased Life(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your maximum hp by 10%
Extra points: +10% additional hp bonus

This passive ability adds some percentile bonus to your hp.
If you play a melee character, you will most likely want to put
some points into this ability, as it is a great way to reach
a high amount of hp, which will be helpful to survive melee
and magic attacks from later monsters. This ability can also
help out magic users, although magic users can make some
physical or magic resistance spells instead.

4. Battle Skill(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your to_hit and chances to overcome melee 
        counters. Converts a portion of your total to_h to
        to_d.
To_h bonus: +20
To_h converted to to_d: 3%
Bonus to overcoming melee counters: +10
Extra points: +20 additional to_hit.
              +10 bonus to overcome melee counters.
              +3% conversion of to_h to to_d.

This passive ability adds some to_hit and chances to overcome
enemy counters that blocks melee attacks. Also, it will convert
a portion of your total to_h bonus to to_d, meaning it will
provide both accuracy and power. Note that it will not help
overcoming "guaranteed block" type counters.

5. Accurate Strike(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Attack that has a high chance to bypass enemy counters,
        and will never miss at all if used outside of a combat feat.
Damages: Normal attack damages(branded weapons are not counted)
Power: 20
Type: Weapon's damages type.
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +20 to power.

This ability deals extra damages. If you use it as part of a combat feat,
it has a chance to bypass any melee blocking counters based on this
ability's power versus the monster's level and dexterity. If used outside
of a combat feat, however, it has a 100% success rate, bypassing both the
hit rate test and enemy counters.

6. Hardiness(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increases your base AC based on your constitution.
Bonus: (Constitution * 5)
Extra points: +(Consitution * 5) to base AC.

This passive ability adds some base AC based on constitution. If
you have a very high constitution, this can be very useful, and the
bonus can be improved further by increasing your Agility.

7. War Cry(Active, level 6)

Effect: Scare enemies around you with a mind-piercing war cry.
Power: 30
Duration: 5
Radius: 5
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +30 to power.
              +1 to duration.
              +1 to radius every 10 points.

War Cry uses a fear effect to scare nearby enemies. Does not
work against uniques. Fear resistant monsters will also not
be affected. This ability is very good when you are surrounded,
and the enemies are too powerful for you. The duration is short
at first, but if you put a few points into it, it can become
very useful as an emergency ability.

8. Counter Attack(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Strike the monster when it miss you.
Damages: Normal attack damages(branded weapons are not counted)
Type: Weapon's damages type.
Extra points: +20% to damages.

Counter attack is a passive ability that makes it dangerous for enemies
to attack you. This ability is very good for characters who focus a
lot on defense. Every time the enemy miss you, you strike back. If you
have a lot of AC, you will benefit a lot from this ability.

9. Leaping Spin(Active, level 6, combat feat)

Effect: Jump, then perform a spin attack upon landing.
Damages: Normal attack damages(branded weapons are not counted)
Jump Radius: 3
Type: Weapon's damages type.
Extra points: +20% to damages.
	      +1 to jump radius for every 10 points.

Leaping spin has two main uses. The first one is to jump to an enemy
group, and damage multiple enemies at once. The second is to be used
as an escaping ability to flee powerful monsters. While not as powerful
as the regular Spin Attack, it has more uses than Spin Attack, and is
a more versatile ability.

10. Weapons Mastery(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Improve melee weapon damages.
Extra points: +10% to melee weapon damages.

This passive ability improves all damages done with melee weapons. Because
it affects every melee attacks you do, this can be very powerful to increase
your melee damages.

FIGHTER
---------

1. Sheer Power(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase base damages rolls of any melee attacks.
Base roll increase: +10%
Extra points: +10% to base roll.
              +5% to Power Attack multipliers.

This passive ability raises the base damages roll of any melee attacks
you make. Since the base damages roll is a key factor in determining
total damages, this passive ability can easily turn a melee attack into
an extremely powerful one. This works with both armed and unarmed
attacks. Also, each points will increase the power attack multipliers
by 5%. So if you have 20 points in Sheer Power, a level 1 power
attack will do 4 times normal damages, a level 2 will do 6 times normal
damages and a level 3 will do 8 times.

2. Defensive Fighting(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Use fighting skill to increase base AC.
Bonus to base AC: Fighting skill * 3.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to bonus.

This passive ability increase your base AC based on your Fighting skill.
This can be very useful, as it makes a primarely offensive skill useful
as a defensive one. Because it is a base AC bonus, it can be improved
further by raising Agility.

3. Taunt(Active, level 1)

Effect: Lure enemies around you into attacking you.
Taunt's power: 20 + 5 points for every points of Charisma higher than 5.
                       (and up to twice the base taunt's strength)
Radius: 5
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +20 to Taunt's power.
              +1 to radius every 5 points.

This ability allows you to taunt enemies into attacking you. When provoked,
the enemies will lose their focus and make several mistakes. This has
many effects:
33% hit rate and defense reduction.
Has a chance to fail casting spells. A roll of this ability's total
power(charisma bonus included) vs the monster's level and mind stat is
rolled. If you win, the monster fails spellcasting.
Doubles the power of Critical Hits for overcoming resistance rolls.

However, because they are in a provoked state, they will charge toward
you recklessly and will gain +3 to speed as a result.

4. Critical Hits(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Target weak points while fighting, to paralyze and damage heavily.
Critical Hits power:
- 5 if used as part of a normal attack or combat feats.
- 20 + strength if used with a special melee attack outside a combat feat.
  In this case, it is also multiplied by the Power Attack modifier.

Paralysis duration: 3 turns
Can be resisted: Yes(strength is used instead of mind)
Extra points: +5 or +20 to Critical Hit's power(depending on how it's used)
              +1 to paralysis duration for every 10 points.
              +1 multiplier to damages for every 10 points.

This passive ability will allow you to get a chance to both paralyze
the enemy you're fighting, as well as do more damages. You can either use
it with normal attacks or special melee abilities with combat feats, in which
case it will have little power, but the number of blows will give you a good
chance in the end. However, if using a special melee ability outside of
a combat feat, then the power is much greater and adds your strength as a bonus.
Power Attacks will increase the success rate even more. Note that enemies
immune to paralysis will not be paralyzed, but any enemies can take the
increased damages.

5. Unarmed Fighting(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Uses your Fighting skill to improve unarmed attacks.
Unarmed base damages roll bonus: 10% of Fighting skill.
Extra points: +10% of Fighting skill added to unarmed base rolls.
              +1 unarmed attack blow for every 3 points.

This passive ability will allow you to greatly improve your unarmed
attacks using the Fighting skill. The ability will take a certain
percentage of your Fighting skill, and directly add it to the base
damage rolls of any unarmed attacks. For example, with a Fighting
skill of 20, you would get a lousy 1d3 attack roll. However, with
10 points in Unarmed Fighting, you would get 1d3+20, resulting in 
a much greater base roll of 21 to 23. Unlike Martial Arts,
Unarmed Fighting can be used while wearing armor and shields without
any penalities. Note that this ability is calculated after the
Sheer Power ability, so the bonus from Unarmed Fighting is not
increased by the Sheer Power ability.

6. Fighter's Accuracy(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your hit rate based on your Fighting skill.
Bonus to_hit: +5/fighting skill points.
Extra points: +5 bonus to_hit per Fighting skill points.

This passive ability will allow you to get a higher hit rate based
on your Fighting skill. This can be useful, and fairly quick way
of greatly increasing your hit rate. This bonus is applied before
dexterity's, so it will be greatly enhanced if you raise your
dexterity as well!

7. Defensive Power Attacks(Passive, level 6)

Effect: When using the Power Attack feat, you gain a bonus to AC,
        as well as physical and magic resistance.
Bonus to_ac: Total ac
Physical/magical resistance: 15%
Duration: Power Attack's duration.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to ac bonus.
              +1% to physical/magical resistance(maximum 75%).

Using a Power Attack leaves you vulnerable for a few turns, but with
this passive ability, you will gain a good bonus to AC, physical
resistance and magic resistance, thus making you a lot less vulnerable,
and will make Power Attacks less risky. If you plan on using a lot
of Power Attacks, this is an ability to consider.

8. Throw(Active, level 6, combat feat)

Effect: Grab an enemy, and throw it to deal damages.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Distance: 3
Extra points: +20% to damages.
              +1 to distance for every 10 points.
              Allow you to throw heavier enemies.

This ability allow you to grab an enemy, and throw it away. This is
a useful ability, as it allows you to deal damages while keeping
enemies away from you. Beware, however, that some enemies are too
heavy to throw, unless you place a lot of points in this ability.
There is no way to know a monster's weight, though common sense
can help a lot here(an ancient dragon is usually bigger and heavier
than a three foot kobold...). This ability is best combined with
Unarmed Fighting, to get more damages out of it.

9. Extreme Strike(Active, level 6)

Effect: When using Power Attack, you may use this attack to deliver
        a very powerful blow, and send enemies far away.
Damages: Base weapon/unarmed damages.
Distance: 5
Extra points: +1 multiplier to damages.
              +1 to distance for every 5 points.

This ability allow you to deliver a very powerful blow to an enemy,
and knock it very far away. This is a very powerful ability,
especially since you have to use Power Attack first, resulting in
even more power. Enemies will take major damages, and will not
have a chance to retaliate. Do be careful however, as if the
ability miss, you will have wasted several turns preparing the
Power Attack and using Extreme Strike, and ultimately fail to do
any damages. Fighter's Accuracy can be a good ability to raise
to help ensuring the success of this ability.

10. Ultimate Power Fighter(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Increase the duration of power attacks, and gives them a chance to
        not end after an attack.
Chance lvl 1 Power Attack will not end: 5%
Chance lvl 2 Power Attack will not end: 3%
Chance lvl 3 Power Attack will not end: 1%
Bonus to duration: 1
Extra points: +5% chances lvl 1 Power Attacks will not end.
              +3% chances lvl 2 Power Attacks will not end.
              +1% chances lvl 3 Power Attacks will not end.
              +1 to all Power Attacks durations.

This passive ability makes your Power Attacks last longer than a single
turn, so you have more time to move and reach the enemies you want to use
it on. Furthermore, this ability grants you a chance that your Power Attack
mode will not end after an attack, and with enough points, you'll be able
to apply the power increase on all your attacks for the entire duration.

MAGE
------

1. Mana Boost(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your maximum mana by 20.
Extra points: 20 additional mana

This passive ability increases your maximum mana by a fixed value. This
ability is very helpful early in the game, as it can give the needed
boost in your mana. However, later in the game, you might want to raise
the High Mage's Increased Mana ability, as it will provide greater bonuses 
in the long run. Nevertheless, this one will help you getting the spells 
you need in the beginning.

2. Force Field(Active, level 1)

Effect: Gives you 25% resistance to physical and magical attacks.
Duration: 10
Extra points: +1% resistance(up to 75%).
              +2 to duration.

Mage characters typically don't have as much hp as melee characters, and
this ability is meant to help them overcome that somewhat. The resistance
starts at 25% and has short duration, but the duration can rise quickly.
Of course, when you have a very high amount of mana, you may want to make
your own protection spells using the Physical Resistance and Magic
Resistance effects, but this one gives you both resistances, can get
a very good duration and cost absolutely no mana to use. Because of that,
this is a nice ability that you can get early and that any characters can
benefit from.

3. Magic Missile(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Cast a magic missile to damage enemies. Also empowers all
        damages done by Missile-based magic attacks.
Damages: 15/(Int - 5)
All Missile attacks damages bonus: +10%
Type: Missile
Extra points: +15 damages/(Int - 5)
              +1 to radius every 10 points.
              +10% to Missile attacks damages.

This ability will allow you to cast a basic Magic Missile spell that will
cause damages to enemies. But should you place many points into it, it
will raise the damages of any attacks that are Missile-based. The Missile
element does a combination of Physical and Mana damages, and therefore is
rarely fully resisted. To make up for this, Spellcraft and Elemental skills
improves it less than other elements, but with this ability, you can make
up for it. The damages bonus to Missile damages doesn't just apply to
spells, but to any attacks that are of Missile element.

As for the offensive ability itself, it is improved by rods and spell power
bonus, just like any regular spells.

4. Spell Absorbtion(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Regain mana from enemy spells(10% of spell damages).
	May also absorb the spell and prevent damages.
Power(prevention): 10
Extra points: +10% absorbtion
              +10 to prevention's power.

This passive ability allow you to regain mana when an enemy cast an
offensive spell at you. Furthermore, when struck by an enemy's spell,
you'll get a test between this ability versus the caster's level and
mind stat. If you win, you will entirely block the incoming spell!
Note that you will always regain mana, regardless of this test's result.
Also, this ability is calculated before the Magic Defense skill, so you 
can have both and they won't interfere with each others!

5. Slow Down(Active, level 1)

Effect: Cast a ball that slow down one enemy by 5%.
Radius: 2
Power: 20
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +20 to power.
              +1% speed reduction for every two points.
	      +1 to radius for every 20 points.

This ability reduces the speed of your enemies by a percentile
value. Since the effect is permanent, it can make a significant difference
when fighting afflicted enemies, and may allow you to beat them much
more easily. Note that it will only work once on a particular enemy.

6. Mirror Images(Active, level 1)

Effect: Create illusions to distract foes.
Number: 5
Level: Same as yours
Hp: Same as yours
Duration: 10
Extra points: +1 multiplier to hp per points.
	      +1 illusion for every points.
              +1 to duration.

This ability will create several illusions of yourself, with the
same level and hp as you. The more points you place in this ability,
the more hp they will have, and the more illusions there will be.
The images are meant to be used as a decoy to distract foes, and
allow you to escape, or move away and cast spells while your
illusions gets pummeled.

7. Damages Curse(Active, level 6)

Effect: Curse an enemy to damage itself when damaging you.
Damages: Monster's attack damages.
Radius: 2
Power: 10
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +1 damages multiplier.
	      +1 to radius for every 20 points.
              +10 to power.

This ability curse one monster(or more, depending on spellcraft and
the level of this ability) to take damages as it attacks you. This
ability can be very useful if you put some points into it. But a
great feature of this ability is that nothing can resist the returned
damages, so this ability can be very useful to kill a monster
immune to physical attacks or one that returns damages. If you plan
to use this ability a lot, make sure you have a good hp, as you will
still take damages from enemy attacks. This is one of the few cursing
spells that will actually works against ANYTHING, elites, bosses
and uniques. However, note that monsters can resist it.

8. Improved Activation(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improve the effects of offensive/healing item activations.
Activation's base power bonus: +50% to activation's base power.
Extra points: +50% to activation's base power.
              -1 to recharge time every 2 points.

This passive ability improve the effects of magical item activations.
Often you will find artifacts that can be activated for a spell. Though
they can be improved with Spellcraft, this ability will improve their
effects even more, turning them into much more dangerous weapons.
Of course, you'll have to actually find the artifacts, but once you do
find them, you'll use them at their full potential! Note that this
improves only magical effects. Effects that allows you to perform a
special melee or ranged attack might not be affected by this. Also,
summoning and teleporting effects are unaffected.

9. Stone To Gold(Active, level 6)

Effect: Turn an item into gold.
Amount: 10% of item's base cost value
Extra points: +10% item's cost value gold

Turning objects into gold has always been a dream, and it can finally
come true! By using this ability, you can sacrifice an item, and turn
it into gold. The amount you gain is based on the item's base cost value,
not on it's calculated value. This means that turning a special item
into gold will not give you more than turning a normal item. This
ability will not work on self-made or store brought items.

10. Animated Knight(Active, level 10)

Effect: Construct a magically animated knight from various items.
Level: Same as yours
Hp: Varies(depends on what you use)
Stats/skills: 10
Extra points: +1 multiplier to monster's hp, hit rate and defense.
	      +2 to monster's level
              +5% to base dice damages(you don't have to reconstruct 
	      the knight for this bonus to apply)
	      +1 to stats

This ability allow you to construct a knight from various pieces of
equipement. You will need five pieces of equipement: a weapon, a
hard armor, an helm, gauntlets and boots. The amount of defense
of the items will determine it's hp and defense, and the weapon's
power will determine the knight's base damages. Any bonuses
to_hit will be added to the monster's hit rate. The knight will
be marked as an imprinted monster, so it will not leave you when you
go to another dungeon level. If you place many points in this ability
and use strong weapons, the knight can become a very dangerous
opponent. To maximise it's damages, you should also raise your
leadership skill and your charisma. The animated knight does not have
a duration. It is permanent until destroyed.

PRIEST
--------

1. Channeling(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Reduce spells creation cost based on your wisdom.
Cost Reduction: 10% of base wisdom.
Extra points: +10% of base wisdom to reduction.

This passive ability reduces the cost of any spells you create based
on your base wisdom. If you plan on focusing on wisdom-based spellcasting,
this can help make spells less difficult to cast, possibly even 100%
accurate. Note that this ability is based on your base wisdom, and any
class, race of items bonus will not apply.

2. Turn Undeads(Active, level 1)

Effect: Turn, destroy or damage undead creatures around you.
Radius: 10
Turn Power: 20
Damages: 40/(Wis - 5)
Extra points: +20 to turn power.
	      +40 damages/(Wis - 5) to all undeads

When affected by this ability, undead creatures will attempt to resist
it. Two numbers will be rolled. The first one is the turning's strength,
and is equal to a random number between 1 and the Turn Power. The
second number is the undead's resistance, which is a random number
between 1 and (level + mind stat). If the turn strength is twice stronger
than the resistance, the undead is turned, and will now fight for you.
Othwerise, but if the turn strength is still higher than the resistance,
the undead will be destroyed. If the resistance is higher than the turn
strength, the undead is not instantly destroyed, although it still takes
damages of 40/(Wis - 5), which can be improved by Spellcraft. Bonus from
magical rods and to spell power will also apply.

3. Divine Blood(Passive, level 1)

Effect: - Improve all stats by 3%
        - Improve Hp regeneration
Extra points: +3% to stats
              +1% hp regeneration every 5 points.

This passive ability will enhance all your base stats, and will make
your hp regeneration faster. The bonus to regeneration applies before
item bonus to regeneration and is cumulative, so if you have both this
and an item that makes regeneration faster, you will see a huge
difference.

4. Blessed Meditation(Active, level 1)

Effect: Gives you a wisdom increase for the next spell. You can also use
        it up to five times to gain an even greater bonus every times.
Wisdom Bonus: 5% of base Wisdom.
Duration: 2
Extra points: +5% to base wisdom per points.
              +1 to duration for every 3 points.

This ability will boost your wisdom for the next spell you cast. The
increase is based on your base wisdom stat, so wearing items will not
actually help raising the bonus. You can also use this ability more
than one time, and receive further increases. You can receive additional
increase up to five times.

5. Dark Prayer(Active, level 1)

Effect: Greatly increase your wisdom for the next spell, but damages
        it afterwards.
Wisdom bonus: +20% of base wisdom.
Duration: 2
Extra points: +20% of base wisdom.
              +1 to duration every 3 points.

By making a prayer to the Archfiends or evil deities, a priest can gain
the power to cast a deadly and powerful spell, but at the price of their
soul. When you use this ability, you will have a great amount of wisdom for
your next spell, but your base wisdom will also be damaged by 5 points,
and you'll have to use potions or spells to restore it. Also note that
if your alignment is positive, this ability will not work.

6. Holy Might(Active, level 1)

Effect: Gives you Blessing, Haste and 20% resistance to physical attacks.
Blessing/Resistance Duration: 5
Haste Duration: Half of blessing/resistance duration.
Resist Physical: +1%
Extra points: +1 to duration.
	      +1% to resist physical for every points. (up to 75%)

This ability allow to get both Blessing(raise to_h and AC) and Haste
(speed +10), as well as giving you a some physical resistance. This ability
is very useful to any type of melee characters, as it instantly sets them
ready for the battle ahead. Both Haste and Blessing are very helpful,
and the physical resistance can become quite if you place many points in
it. Note that this is a temporary physical shield, just like the alteration,
and is treated as a separate source of protection rather than normal
physical resistance.

7. School Focus: Mysticism(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Reduce the creation cost of mysticism spells.
Cost reduction: 1%
Additonal cost reduction: 3
Extra points: +1% cost reduction(up to a maximum of 75%).
		+3 additional cost reduction.

This passive ability will make the creation cost of Mysticism spells
cheaper, allowing you to create more powerful spells for a lesser amount
of mana. The Mysticism school of spells offer spells that can heal you
or restore your attributes, but also spells to harm your foes, and
specialized spells to fight undeads, demons and evil creatures.

8. Improved Wisdom Casting(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improve the success rate of wisdom-based spellcasting.
Extra points: - Add 1 to cast strength/wisdom for every 10 points.
	      - Casting strength improves by 10% for every points.
	      - For every 20 points, adds 1 to the "risky" spell multiplier.

This ability will increase the success rate of wisdom-based spellcasting.
Normally, according to the formula of wisdom-based spellcasting, you
get a casting strength of 5 for every Wisdom points higher than 5. By
raising this ability, the casting strength will also increase, allowing
you to cast more spells for free, increase your success rate and even
reduce the chance of backfiring. Also, normally, a risky spell is a spell
that costs more than three times your casting strength. For every 20
points, this will increase(with 20 points, a risky spell will be a spell
that costs more than four times. At 40, it becomes five times and so on).
If you plan on focusing on wisdom-based spellcasting, you should consider
placing some points in this ability.

9. Retrograde Darkness(Active, level 6)

Effect: Turn an elite/boss undead or demon into a normal monster.
Radius: 0
Power: 30
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +30 to power.
              +1 to radius for every 10 points.

This ability will turn elite and boss undeads/demons into nothing more than
normal monsters. Combined to the fact that this attack has a radius, it can
be very useful when you encounter large packs of undeads or demons, has these
groups often have at least one elite or boss. This is also useful when
fighting monsters that can summon monsters, as they might summon undead or
demonic elites and bosses. In the later parts of the game, some bosses are
extremely hard to kill, and having this free ability can save your life.

10. Light Of Life(Active, level 10)

Effect: Does light damages to enemies around you based on your hp.
Damages: Current hp
Type: Light
Radius: 5
Extra points: +1 multiplier to damages.
              +1 to radius for every 30 points.

This ability allow you to emit a strong circle of light that deals
damages to enemies around you. The damages are based on your
current hp, so to use this ability effectively, you must have
a good hp. Raising your Constitution to a high level might be a
good idea should you decide to focus in this ability. Do note
that damages are based on your current hp, so if you get hurt,
this ability will get weaker. Also note that spellcraft does not
increase the damages of this ability.

ROGUE
-------

1. Stealthy Fighter(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Use your Stealth skill as a Fighting or Shooting skill.
% of Stealth used: 10%
Extra points: +10% of Stealth used, up to a maximum of 100% at 10 points.
              For every points above 10, 10% of your Stealth is added to any
              rolls to bypass enemy melee and ranged blocking counters.

This passive ability allows you to use your Stealth as a skill to improve
both your melee and shooting abilities, while retaining all the benefits of
the Stealth skill. Stealth is very useful to avoid being attacked by enemies,
and this ability will allow you to do that without hampering your ability
to deal damages.

2. Thievery(Active/Passive, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Steal items from enemies, and also increase stealth. It may just be
        a Rogue's instinct for treasure hunting, but these stolen items tends
        to be unusually valuable... And was the monster really carrying that
        much gold???
Power of stealing: 20 + (3% of Stealth) + (3% of Dexterity)
Bonus to Stealth: +5%
Extra points: +(20 + (3% of Stealth) + (3% of Dexterity)) to Steal power.
              +5% to Stealth.
              The quality of items just keeps getting better!
              (partially based on Stealth)

When you use this ability on ane enemy, you have a chance to steal an item
it carries based on this ability's level and your stealth versus the monster's
level and dexterity. If you succeed, you will steal the item, and will be more
powerful than it would have been if you just killed the monster. So while
attempting to steal may be risky, it will be worth it if you succeed. Note that
this ability has no effects on monsters that carries no items. Also, if you
steal gold, the amount of gold stolen will increase with this ability's level.

As a passive effect, it also gives a boost to your Stealth, which can be useful
if your character is built around it.

3. Rogue Weapons Mastery(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increases damages of 'Rogue' weapons, that is, concealable light blades
        and ranged weapons(daggers, short swords, crossbows, pistols, etc...).
        In other words, increase damages with any Daggers or Swords with a
        weight of 10 or lower, as well as one-handed ranged weapons.
Bonus damages: +10%
Extra points: +10% to damages with 'Rogue' weapons.

Rogues have always favored effective and concealable weapons, such as daggers,
short blades, pistols, one-handed crossbows, etc... This improves the damages
dealt with these weapons. Because it improves both melee and ranged weapons,
this can be a useful ability if you seek versatility.

4. Swashbuckler(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Improves dexterity, melee parrying and allow you to counter attack
        whenever you successfully parry. To benefit from the parry bonus
        and the counter attack ability, your weapon must be a bladed
        weapon(sword or dagger) with a weight of 10 or less.
Bonus to Dexterity: +10%
Bonus to Parry rolls: +10%
Bonus to counter attack damages: +10%
Extra points: +10% to Dexterity.
              +10% to Parry rolls.
              +10% to counter attack damages.

This passive ability makes you a swashbuckler, a fencer who fights with
dexterity and style. This allows you to gain extra dexterity, and if you
wield the proper weapon, also improves parrying and allows you to counter
attack. Note that you must wield a weapon that enables parrying(it must
have a base AC bonus), and it must be a bladed weapon with a weight of
10 or less.

5. Lockpicking(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Greatly improves your chances of opening locked chests. Also allows
        you to attempt unlocking Magic chests.
Bonus to Lockpicking rolls: +50%
Extra points: +50% to Lockpicking rolls.
              More bonus based on the ability's level:
              5+ points: Allows you to attempt unlocking Cursed chests.
              10+ points: Allows you to attempt unlocking Ancient chests.
                          Also, guarantees 100% success rate on Iron chests.
              20+ points: Guarantees 100% success rate on Large Steel chests.
              30+ points: Allows you to attempt unlocking Strange chests.
              40+ points: Guarantees 100% success rate on Magic chests.
              50+ points: Guarantees 100% success rate on Cursed chests.
              75+ points: Guarantees 100% success rate on Ancient chests.
              100 points: Guarantees 100% success rate on Strange chests.

This passive ability is a required ability to open the higher level locked
chests that you will find in the dungeons. Locked chests typically contains
higher level items than you would normally find on the dungeon level, but
the amount of dexterity and intelligence required to even attempt lockpicking,
let alone succeed, is very high. This ability will GREATLY raise the chance.
Magic chests requires at least one point in this ability in order to become
unlockable, and higher quality chests requires more. Note that with enough
points, you get 100% chance to open certain chests. However, you must still
have enough dex/int to attempt to unlock it in the first place.

6. Deadly Stalker(Passive, level 1)

Effect: When striking an enemy with a melee attack while using a temporary
        insibility ability(such as Stealth's Hide feat), a stealth roll for
        detection is made. If the monster fails, it will take extra damages.
        If you do get the bonus, also has a chance to paralyze.
Extra melee damages: +33%
Paralysis power: 20
Paralysis duration: 2 turns.
Extra points: +33% extra melee damages.
              +20 to paralysis power.
              +1 to paralysis duration for every 10 points.

This passive ability gives you a chance to get additional damages with
any melee attacks while invisible through a special ability. The success
rate is based on your stealth and the invisibility's power, versus the monster's
level and mind stat. Note that while no monsters are immune to this effect,
elites and bosses have better detection, and uniques have even more. Note
that this ability applies to any melee attacks, even special melee abilities.

If you succeed in getting the damages, you also get a chance to paralyze your
victim. The test is between this ability's level versus the monster's level
and strength. Note that monsters immune to paralysis will not be affected
by this effect(but still receive the damages bonus).

7. Art of Poisoning(Active/Passive, level 6)

Effect: Change a weapon, ammo or gloves damages type to Poison. Improves the
        damages of Poison attacks, and allow them to ignore resistances.
Bonus to Poison damages: +5%
Resistances ignored: 3%
Extra points: +5% to Poison damages.
              +3% resistances ignored.

This ability can be used to change a weapon's damages type to Poison.
As a passive bonus, it will improve the damages of all Poison attacks(melee,
ranged and magic), as well as allowing them to ignore some of the resistances
a monster may have. Many monsters are naturally immune to Poison, and this
ability can help you deal with them more easily. If the monster does not
have any resistances to poison, the resistance will be treated as a weakness,
and you will deal more damages. For example, with 10 points in this ability,
a monster with no resistances to Poison will take 30% more damages.

8. Finishing Blow(Active, level 6, combat feat)

Effect: A melee attack that deals huge damages to enemies afflicted by a status
        ailment(such as paralysis, fear, confusion, etc...).
Bonus damages to afflicted targets: +100%
Bonus damages to non-afflicted targets: +10%
Extra points: +100% bonus damages to afflicted targets.
              +10% bonus damages to non-afflicted targets.

This ability is a melee attack that will deal severe damages to an enemy
afflicted by some form of status ailment. This includes paralysis, fear,
confusion and sleep. This ability is most useful if you also took Deadly Stalker,
or another ability that can cause status ailments(such as the Fighter's
Critical Hits). However, even if the enemy doesn't have any status ailments,
this ability is still more powerful than a normal attack, so you can use
it as a general combat feat ability to improve your damages in all situations.

9. Stealthy and Cunning(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Adds points to your intelligence based on your Stealth.
Bonus to Intelligence: +5% of your Stealth.
Extra points: +5% of your Stealth to Intelligence.

This passive ability will improve your intelligence based on your Stealth.
Intelligence gives you mana, and magic can be a helpful complementary ability
to a Rogue, especially alteration spells to paralyze your opponents(and finish
them with Finishing Blow), or Poison elemental spells if you also took
Art of Poisoning. Other spells can also be helpful and this ability will make
access to them much easier. Finally, Intelligence is used with picking locks,
so this ability can also be used as a complementary ability to Lockpicking.

10. Black Market's Bounty Hunter(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Gain gold after every kills. Increase the quality of items sold
        at the Black Market.
Black Market item level/magic level increase: +2
Extra points: +20% gold gained from kills.
              +2 to Black Market's maximum item level and magic level.

After every kills, you will gain an amount of gold equal to the experience
value of the monster times 5. That amount is then increased by this ability's
level. The ability will also increase the limit of items available in the
black market. Normally, any items of depth level 40 or higher will never
appear in the black market. However, this will allow them to appear, and
with the gold you've made from kills, you'll be able to buy them more easily.
Magic items in the black market will also be improved.

RANGER
--------

1. Wilderness Lore(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Helps you know more about your surroundings.
Radius: 3
Extra points: +1 to radius for every points.
	      +1 to infravision for every points.
	      With 5 or more points, you gain Telepathy.

Wilderness lore acts like if you were casting a Reveal type spell around
yourself as you walk. It's a free, passive ability that can very well
replace a torch or any other light sources. At higher level, it can be
useful to know where exactly you are going, and it's also extremely
useful to see all monsters, allowing you to elaborate plans to defeat
them more easily.

2. Forestry(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your combat ability in forests/grass areas. Allow you to
	  walk trough trees.
Bonus to_hit: +30
Bonus to_dam: +30
Bonus to_ac: +30
Bonus to speed: +1
Bonus to stealth: +5
Bonus to melee and ranged base damages: +10%
Extra points: +30 to_hit, to_dam and to_ac.
	      +5 to stealth.
	      +1 to speed points.
	      +10% to base melee and ranged damages.

The rangers are keepers of the forest and wilderness, and this ability allow
them to do so in a very effective way. Although this ability won't always be
active(as is only work when standing on grass or trees), the bonuses are
quite significant. Whenever you enter a dungeon level full of trees and grass,
this ability will become extremely powerful.

3. Entangle(Active, level 1)

Effect: Create a field of entangling vines to slow down enemies.
Radius: 1
Extra points: +1 to radius for every 2 points.

This ability allow you to summon vine fields. Enemies only have a 25% chance
of successfully walking trough a vine field, so it will make their movement
harder(note that they may move more than once depending on their speed, so the
vines will slow them down, but not completely stop them). This ability is useful 
to ranged attackers, who can summon a vine field, and then shoot the slowed 
enemies from a distance. Note that elites, bosses and uniques will have a 60% 
chance of walking trough a vine field, and giants('P'), ancient dragons('D') 
and plants/molds('m') aren't affected.

4. Animal Empathy(Active, level 1)

Effect: Charm animals around you, or make elites/boss/unique animals flee.
Radius: 5
Base power: 50
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: Improved success rate(+50 power for every points)
	      +1 to radius for every 10 points.

This ability allow you to make enemy animals around you friendly, or strike fear
in elite/boss/unique animals. While it only work on monsters marked as ANIMALS,
it can be very useful against some animals who travel in large packs, such as
hounds. The success rate depends on the animal's level and mind stat. 
To make this ability even more useful, increase your Leadership
skill and Charisma, so that charmed animals will be able to do great damages!

5. Call Animals(Active, level 1)

Effect: Summon animals to fight on your side.
Number: 1
Duration: 10
Extra points: Allow you to summon stronger animals.
		+1 to duration for every points.
		+1 animal for every points.

This ability allow you to summon animals to fight on your side. If you have
a good Leadership skill and Charisma, they can be quite powerful, especially
since this ability has no cost whatsoever. Note that although the number
increases every points, it will not go beyond what summoning spells and
abilities can call at a time, which is around 20 monsters.

6. Warp On Trees(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Allow you to teleport to a nearby tree.
Radius: 5
Extra points: +1 to radius for every points.

This ability allow you to teleport yourself to a nearby tree, allowing you
to flee from deadly enemy encounters. This ability can be extremely useful 
on forest levels, or if you combine it with the "Grow Trees" spell from the 
school of Conjuration. It can also be used for hit-and-run tactics as a
combat feat.

7. Weapon Finesse(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Uses Dexterity instead of Strength to increase damages.
Max dexterity used: 5
Extra points: +5 to max dexterity used.

This passive ability allow you to use your dexterity to deal damages instead
of your Strength. This can be useful, as dexterity will then provide both
damages increase and better hit rate. But it can be especially good if
you also plan on raising your Shooting skill. This way, you will be very
good at both melee combat and ranged combat.
The way this ability is used is that for every points of dexterity higher
than 5, you will get a +5 to_d and a general +(dexterity)% to damages, just
like strength. However, if your dexterity is let's say 15, but this ability
is only at level 1, you will only be able to get the damage bonus up to
a dexterity of 10. Thus, your last 5 points of dexterity will be ignored.
Also note that this ability is not cumulative with strength. If your
strength results in a higher damages bonus, it will be used instead.

8. Thorned Vines(Active, level 6)

Effect: Conjure fields of thorned vines to injure your foes.
Damages: 10/((Int or Wis) - 5) (will use whichever stat is the highest)
Type: Earth
Radius: 2
Extra points: +10 damages/((Int or Wis) - 5)
		+1 to radius for every 20 points.

This ability allow you to place thorned vines on the floor. Enemies passing
trough the fields will take earth type damages. This ability is good to
stop a horde of small enemies, but if you invest many points into it, it can
become good to stop any kind of enemies. The radius will increase over time,
although not much, but a starting radius of 2 is good, considering this
ability cost no mana to use. Spellcraft will help making the damages higher.

9. Sleep Pollen(Active, level 6)

Effect: Sends sleeping pollen in the air around you, and put enemies to sleep.
Power: 20
Radius: 3
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: Improves success rate(+20 to Power)
		+1 to radius for every 10 points.

This ability allow you to cast a circle of sleeping pollen, and put enemies
around you to sleep. This ability can be quite useful if you are surrounded
by powerful enemies, or if you combine this with backstabbing abilities. The
success rate depends on the enemy's level and mind. This ability will not
work against sleep resistant enemies.

10. Force Of Nature(Active, level 10)

Effect: Temporarely raise your Strength, Dexterity and Constitution when
        standing on trees or grass.
Stats bonus: +10
Duration: 10
Extra points: +10 to stats bonus.
		+1 to duration for every two points.

This ability allow you to empower yourself with the essence of nature, raising
your main combat stats, that is, Strength, Dexterity and Constitution. While
this ability can only be used on grass or trees type terrains, the bonuses are
considerable. If you place a couple of points in this ability, you will notice
your combat ability becoming very powerful. The duration is not too long, but
is probably enough to kill quite a couple of foes, especially if you have speed
bonuses. The best way to use this ability is to combine it with the Grow Trees
spell, as it will allow you to use it more often.

PALADIN
---------

1. Divine Strength(Active, level 1)

Effect: Temporarely raise your strength.
Bonus to strength: +10%
Duration: 5
Extra points: +10% to strength. 
              +1 to duration.

This ability allow to temporarely raise your strength for the duration of the
ability. It affects your total strength, so any items you wear that raises
it will contribute to make this ability stronger.

2. Holy Bolts(Active, level 1)

Effect: Focus holy light into your weapon to release a powerful bolt of light.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Type: Light
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 bolt every 10 points.

This ability allow you to cast a bolt of Light at your enemy. The damages
are based on your melee weapon damages, and this is treated as a magical
attack, so you might want to raise your wisdom in order to bypass enemies'
magic countering abilities they might have. If you place many points, you
can eventually cast more bolts.

3. Aura Of Life(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Heal yourself and friendly monsters around you. Also damage undeads.
Healing on self: 3
Healing on friendly monsters or damages to undeads: 20/(Wis - 5)
Radius: 3
Extra points: +3 to healing.
              +20 healing on friendly monsters or damages to undead/(Wis - 5).
              +1 to radius for every 10 points.

This ability will allow you to recover hp as you move, while healing
friendly monsters and damaging undead creatures. Both the self healing
and the monster healing/undead damaging effects are affected by your
spellcraft and mysticism skills, as well as your wisdom, following the
standard spells power formula.

4. Evil Slayer(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: A melee attack that does a lot of damages to evil creatures and may
        cause fear.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Fear power: 20
Fear duration: 10
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +50% to damages against evil creatures, +10% against others.
              +20 to fear power(evil only)
              +1 to fear duration.

Evil Slayer will deal more damages than a normal attack, especially against
creatures marked as Evil. If you successfully hit an evil creature with this
ability, it will have to win a resistance roll between this ability's power
versus it's level and mind, or become scared for several turns. Note that
fear resistance monsters will resist the fear effect.

5. Blade Of Purity(Active, level 1)

Effect: Conjure an undead and demon slaying sword.
Damages: 2d5
To_hit, to_dam: +3
Abilities: Undead Slayer, Demon Slayer
Damages Type: Light
Duration: 10
Extra points: +1d1 base damages for every 3 points.
              +3 to_hit, to_d per points.
	      +2 to duration
              With 10 or more points, the sword becomes permanent. It can then
              be unequipped and enchanted through scrolls or other means, like
              regular items.

This ability will conjure a sword in your hands that is made of pure light,
and is a undead and demon slayer. The damages and to_h/to_d bonus will
improve as you put more points in the ability. This weapon can be
extremely deadly against undeads and demons, because not only will they
take great damages from the Undead and Demon slaying abilities, but most
of them are also weak against light.

6. Resist Impure(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Resistance to poison, radio, darkness and chaos attacks.
Resistance: 25%
Extra points: +5% resistance.

This passive ability grants you resistance to many impure type of magic spells,
as mentionned above. No items can give you immunity to the types mentionned
above, so should you decide to invest some points in this ability, you will
eventually become immune to five more attacks types. Furthermore, if you have
more than 100% resistance, you will actually be healed. So if you have let's
say 150% resistance to a 5000 damages poison breath, you will get healed for 2500
hp. Note that this ability does not add to normal resistances to other elements.
It is a separate source of protection.

7. Feat Of Faith(Active, level 6)

Effect: Gain bonus ac and a great bonus to your Strength and Dexterity.
Bonus to Strength and Dexterity: +20
Bonus to AC: 10% of current AC.
Duration: 2
Extra points: +5 to Strength and Dexterity.
		+10% of current AC.

This ability will give you enormous bonuses, but it will only last for one or
two actions, depending on your speed. This ability is mostly useful when you are
about to face a powerful and tough enemy, who would otherwise be too difficult
to hit or too hard to damage.

8. Bless Weapon(Active, level 1)

Effect: Allow you to imbue a weapon with magical properties.
Bonus to_hit and to_damage: +3
Abilities: Light Branded, Permanent Light, Indestructible.
Brand power: 200
Extra points:   +2 to_hit and to_damage.
		+1d1 to dice sides for every five points.
                +200 brand damages per points.
		Extra abilities gained:
		5+ points: Resistance to light(2% per points).
		10+ points: Gain Strength boosting ability(+1 for every points).
		15+ points: Gain Dexterity boosting ability(+1 for every points).
		20+ points: Gain Demon and Undead slaying ability.
		30+ points: Gain Extra Blows ability(+1 for every 5 points).

This ability allow you to enhance a weapon with magical powers. It can be
applied to any melee weapons, even if they are already magical. They will
then be enhanced further.

Tip: If you use this on a levelable weapon, it's a good idea to use it before
starting to level up your weapon. This will result in the item getting higher
increases.

9. Shining Armor(Active, level 6)

Effect: Armor gain various abilities and enhancements.
Base AC bonus: +5
To_hit, to_dam, to_ac: +2
Abilities: Permanent light, Indestructible.
Extra points: +5 to base AC.
	      +1 to_hit, to_dam, to_ac.
		Extra abilities gained:
		5+ points: Resistance to light(2% per ability points).
		10+ points: Resistance to darkness(2% per ability points).
		15+ points: Gain life boosting ability(5% per points).
		20+ points: Gain Constitution bonus(+1 per points).
		25+ points: Paralysis resistance, will no longer hinder spellcasting.
		70+ points: Gain Protection ability(reduce all damages by 50%).

This ability will bless an armor with divine power, and will turn it into a
powerful one. The increase to base AC is a static value, so you can use this
to your advantage and enhance low AC armors that does not hinder spellcasting.
You can use this on any armors, even magical ones, to enhance them further.

Tip: If you use this on a levelable armor, it's a good idea to use it before
starting to level up your armor. This will result in the item getting higher
increases.

10. Champion of Good(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Become a powerful fighter in the name of good.
Strength bonus: +10%/positive alignment points.
Constitution bonus: +10%/positive alignment points.
Charisma bonus: +10%/positive alignment points.
to_h bonus: +20/positive alignment points.
to_d bonus: +20/positive alignment points.
to_a bonus: +50/positive alignment points.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to all of the above bonus.	      

This passive ability will allow you to become a very powerful warrior,
based on your alignment. Depending on the various choices you make during
the game, your alignment may change for the better or for the worse.
For every points of alignment above 0, you will gain several bonuses,
and this ability has the potential to become extremely powerful later
on if you focus on it. Of course, being a champion of good means you'll
need to pay attention to the choices you make, or you might end up losing
alignment and make this ability weaker. Note that your stats will not
get lower if your alignment falls below 0 and you have points in this
ability.

MONK
------

1. Unarmored Combat(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Gives you a bonus to your base AC.
Bonus to base AC: +4
Extra points: +4 to base AC. 

This passive ability allow you to increase your base AC while not wearing
any armor. While the bonus might not seem so great, keep in mind that it
is the BASE AC that is increased, and that it is compatible with the
agility skill. If you raise both this ability and your agility skill, your
AC can become very high, and if you invest a lot in this ability, it may
become even better than the strongest suits of armor. Combined with the
bonus of the martial arts skill, this ability can easily help you forget
about wearing any kind of armor.

2. Spin Kick(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Does physical damages to enemies around you.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Radius: 1
Type: Physical
Extra points: +20% to damages.

Spin kick does physical damages to enemies around you. It can be
useful is you are surrounded, and it's also a helpful ability to
defeat the physical returning bosses, as special physical attacks
such as this one or physical-type spells are not returned to you.
It can also become quite powerful should you decide to invest
some points into it. This ability works exactly the same as the
warrior's Spin Attack, but it is entirely based on your to_d, so
in order to use it properly, make sure your Martial Arts skill
is high enough.

3. Hard Kick(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Does physical damages and sends the enemy away.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Distance: 3
Type: Physical
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 to distance for every 10 points.

This ability allow you to give a single enemy a blow with so much
force that it will be knocked away. This ability also do physical
damages, and it can become fairly powerful with many points. Should
you decide to invest a couple of points into it, you will notice
that you can keep knocking the enemy away, while slowly killing it
and it will never be able to hit you because you keep using the
Hard Kick. Make sure you have a good Martial Arts skill to maximize
the damage potential of this ability.

4. Grappling Throw(Passive, level 1)

Effect: When an enemy attacks, grab it and throw it away.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Radius: 3
Type: Physical
Extra points: +10 to_hit on throwing to_hit test.
              +5% to damages.
              +1 to radius for every 20 points.

When you get attacked, you will be prompted whether or not you want to 
attempt a throw attack. If you decide to try it, there will be a regular 
to_hit test. If you succeed, you will grab the enemy and throw it away, 
dealing some damages in the process as well. However, if you fail, the
monster will get a bonus to it's hit rate for the next attack. It is
important to know that this is not a damages dealing ability, but
rather a defensive ability, although it can do some nice damages. Also
note that if the enemy is too heavy, you will not be able to throw it.
Increasing your strength allow you to throw heavier creatures.

5. Wisdom(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your wisdom by 5%
Extra points: +5% additional wisdom bonus

This passive ability adds some percentile bonus to your wisdom.
Wisdom will give you bonus skill points if you raise it high enough,
and raising this ability can be the key to get an impressive amount
of skill points. How much points you place in this ability depends
on how much you value skill points. You could put less points into
wisdom and use this ability to compensate, or you could place a lot
of points into wisdom and raise this skill to gain tons of skill
points every levels!

6. Ki Punch(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Punch attack infused with inner energy.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Type: Missile
Extra points: +10% to damages.

This ability allow you to strike an ennemy with a punch that does
missile-type damages(half-physical, half-magical). The main features of
this ability is that first of all, it never miss, and second, it can be
used against any kinds of opponents. Do note however that magic returning
bosses will return damages from this ability. Should you focus a lot
in this ability, it can become quite powerful, and while Martial Arts
skill should be the main way of empowering it, Spellcraft can also
slightly improve it as well.

7. One With Body & Mind(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Increase both your hp and mana.
Bonus: +15 to hp and mana.
Extra points: +15 additional points to hp and mana.

This passive ability raise both your hp and your mana. If you use a lot
of magic, or simply need more hp(and probably both), then this ability
can be very helpful. By raising both stats, you will get the mana to
cast powerful spells without reducing your capacity to survive blows
from enemies.

8. Monk Speed(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Increase your speed while unarmored.
Bonus: +1 to speed.
Extra points: +1 to speed for every two points.

This passive ability raises your speed. Speed is very important later
in the game when enemies starts becoming very fast and hard to avoid.
Although this ability requires you to be unarmored, high speed will
usually more than make up for it, especially if you placed points
in Unarmored Combat ability.

9. High Somersault(Active, level 6, combat feat)

Effect: Perform a sommersault kick, and move away.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Radius: 3
Extra points: +20% to damages.

This ability would be best described as a hit and run type ability.
You hit the enemy with a powerful kick, and then jump a short distance
away. This can be very useful to hit a strong, quick monster and
escape immediately after. And it is also an excellent way to take down
a powerful boss that return physical damages.

10. Martial Arts Mastery(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Gives +2 to martial arts skill.
Extra points: +2 additional points to martial arts skill

Similar to the other mastery abilities such as Weapon Mastery or Rogue Mastery,
this passive ability gives you a bonus to your martial arts skill. If you want
to get the highest possible Martial Arts skill, then you will want to place
points in this ability. Having a very high Martial Arts skill will make your
unarmed attacks extremely devastating.

MARKSMAN
----------

Note: 'Maximum shots' refers to the maximum number of shots you can fire in
one turn with the ability. So with six points in Power Shot, for example,
you can fire up to three Power Shots per turns. Note, however, that you
may never fire more shots than the maximum number of shots you have, and
of course, should you run out of ammos or need to reload, this will also
interrupt your attacks. Finally, if you dual wield ranged weapons, such
as using two pistols, you will get to fire with both weapons.

Unless otherwise specified, all active abilities will take the elemental
properties of your ranged weapon or ammos if the ranged weapon does regular
physical damages.

1. Power Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: A shot that deals a lot of damages.
Damages: Base shot damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Extra points: +30% to damages.
              +1 maximum shots every 3 points.

This ability fires a shot that is more powerful than a regular shot. Though
it has no other effects, it's an excellent ability if your main concern
is dealing damages with ranged attacks.

2. Paralyzing Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: A shot that can paralyze the target.
Damages: Base shot damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Power: 20
Paralysis duration: 3
Can be resisted: Yes(strength)
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 maximum shots every 10 points.
              +20 to paralysis power.
              +1 to paralysis duration every 10 points.

This ability allows you to fire a shot that has a chance to paralyze the
target. If you hit your target, a test between this ability's power and
the monster's level + strength stat will be rolled. If you win, the
monster will become paralyzed for a couple of turns. Note that the
paralyzing effect will not work against enemies immune to paralysis.

3. Ricochet Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: A shot that quickly ricochets on many targets(this is treated as a ball
        attack).
Damages: Base shot damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Radius: 2
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 maximum shots every 3 points.
              +1 to radius every 10 points.

This ability allows you to fire a shot that will damage multiple enemies
at once. This can be quite useful when facing large groups of enemies,
as it allows you to damage them all at once.

4. Counter Shot(Passive, level 1)

Effect: When targetted by a ranged or magic attack, immediatly fire a shot
        at the attacker.
Damages: Base shot damages.
Extra points: +20% to damages.

With this passive ability, you will be able to fire a shot back at any monsters
that would attempt to shoot at you, or cast a spell. The ability will trigger
after the attack's execution. If you want to turn off this ability, you may
do so using the 'K' command to toggle it off. Remember that it consumes ammos
and can deplete them quickly if you're facing a group of casters or ranged
attackers. By default, the ability will be off when you learn it, so make
sure you turn it on.

5. Rapid Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: Shoot a very quick shot that is difficult to avoid. It's so fast you
        might even have time to reload your weapon in the same turn!
Damages: Base shot damages.
Bonus to_hit: +20%
Maximum shots: 3
Chance to reload: 10%
Extra points: +5% to damages.
              +20% to_hit per points.
              +3% chance to reload.
              +1 maximum shots.

Although a bit weaker in terms of raw power, Rapid Shot has the highest
firing rate out of all the ranged attack skills of the Marksman, starting at
3 maximum shots and increasing every points. The shots have high hit rate,
and there's a chance the weapon will be reloaded at every shots. If you were
to place 30 points in this ability, you would never need to reload your
weapon after using this ability.

6. Spinning Storm Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: A shot that becomes an edged wind gust, and spins around you to
        damage enemies.
Damages: Base shot damages.
Type: Wind
Maximum shots: 1
Radius: 1
Extra points: +20% to damages.
              +1 maximum shots every 5 points.
              +1 to radius every 10 points.
              With 10 or more points, the ability will create storms.
              They deal 20% of the damages a regular Storm Shot would.

Though not a long range attack, this ability has many other uses. It can be
used as a source of elemental damages, and it can also be useful if you
find yourself surrounded by enemies. Finally, if you place at least 10
points, it will leave behind storms, which will damages enemies walking
through them. Storms deals pure magical damages, and are not treated
as ranged attacks, but magic attacks(although they are not returned by
magic returning enemies).

7. Enhance Ranged Weapon(Active, level 6)

Effect: Improve various attributes of your ranged weapons.
Extra points: See below.

This ability allows you to select one of your ranged weapons, and enhance
it. There are many types of enhancements you can apply. You'll be asked to
choose one when you use this ability. The enhancements can be applied to
any ranged weapons, even magical or crafted ones, although you can only
apply one enhancement per weapons. Note that you will not be able to sell
enhanced weapons.

Tip: If you find a levelable ranged weapon, it's better to use this ability
before starting to level it, as it will result in higher bonus.

1. General Enhancement

This type of enhancement improves many attributes of your weapon. It has
the following benefits:

+3 to_hit and to_dam bonus per points.
+1 to maximum ammo capacity for every 5 points.
+1 extra shots for every 10 points.
+10 to weapon's power per points.

2. Velocity Enhancement

A type of enhancement that focus on the weapon's fire and reload speed.
It will provide these benefits:

+1 to maximum ammo capacity for every 2 pojnts.
+1 extra shots for every 5 points.
-1 to ammo consumption for every 10 points(cannot go below 1).

3. Power Enhancement

A type of enhancement that focus on improving the weapon's power.
It will provide these benefits:

+5 to_hit and to_dam bonus per points.
+20 to weapon's power per points.
With 10 or more points, you may change the weapon's elemental damages
type to any Elemental spells you've learned. Note that you must
actually create a spell out of the element, as you'll have to choose
from your spells list, but the power or cost of the spell doesn't matter.

8. Aim(Active, level 6)

Effect: Gain a good amount of dexterity for a short time.
Bonus to dexterity: +10% of dexterity.
Duration: 5
Extra points: +10% of dexterity to dexterity.
              +1 to duration.

By using this ability, you will gain a good amount of dexterity that will
empower your next shots and greatly increase their accuracy. The bonus is
based on your total dexterity, so any items that increase dexterity will
make this ability more powerful. Also, the increase apply to your raw
dexterity, so it's also useful if you combine melee weapons with your
ranged weapons.

9. Piercing Shot(Active, level 6)

Effect: A shot that ignores some of the monster's resistances.
Damages: Base shot damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +5% resistance ignored.
              +1 maximum shots every 4 points.
              With 10 or more points, ignores '50% damages reduction' ability
              of elites and bosses.
              With 20 or more points, ignores the immunity abilities of
              elites and bosses.

This ability fires a shot that will ignore some of the target's resistances
at a rate of 5% per points. So with 20 points in this ability, you wouldn't
have to worry about resistances ever again. While there are many ways to
get elemental damages on your weapons and ammos, this provides a reliable
ability that can be used with any weapons. At 10 and 20 points, it also
ignores some abilities of elite and boss monsters.

10. Accurate Shots(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Gives all shots a chance to never miss, as well as increased damages.
Power: 20
Extra points: +20 to power.
              +10% to all shots damages.

This passive ability gives all your shots a chance to land a guaranteed hit
that will ignore the defense and any counters the monster may have. A test
of this ability's power versus the monster's level and dexterity stat will
be rolled. If you win the roll, the shot will cause damages, ignoring all
defense and counters of the monster. Furthermore, all shots will have
increased damages.

BARD
------

1. Improved Songs(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Improve the effects of songs.
Damages bonus to damaging/healing songs: +10%
Power bonus to ailment songs: +3%
Extra points: +10% to damaging/healing songs damages.
+3% to effect/status songs power.
+1 to songs radius for every 10 points.

This passive ability improves the effect of songs by increasing their power
and radius. It will increase the power of damaging and healing songs, and
increase the success rate of status-ailment inflicting songs. This is a very
useful ability if you plan on using Music as your primary means of offense.

2. Create Songs(Active, level 1)

Effect: Allows you to compose your own songs without any components.
Power: 5
Radius: 1
Extra points: +5 to power.
+1 to radius for every 5 points.

Normally, to compose a song, one needs to find a pre-composed melody, harmony
and rhythm. With this ability, however, you can create your own songs without
any components. When you use this ability, you'll be asked to choose one of
your spells. Not all spells will work. You may choose any offensive direct
effect, such as an Elemental spell or Mysticism's Heal Other or Mystical
offensive spells. Only the first effect of the spell will be used.

After that, pick a song slot, and the song will be created with the calculated
power and radius. There is no charisma requirement, You may use the song the
minute you compose it. Success rate of songs with special effects such as Warp
or Harm will be based on your Charisma and Music skill, as opposed to int/wis
and the schools skills.

3. Inspire Courage(Active, level 1)

Effect: Raise friendly monsters' attributes.
Bonus to level: +2
Bonus to stats and skills: +3%
Bonus to summons duration: +3
Radius: 5
Extra points: +2 to level.
+3% to stats and skills.
+3 to summon duration.
+1 to radius for every 10 points.

This ability will first raise the level of friendly monsters, and apply the
level bonus. Then, the new stats will be further improved by a bonus determined
by this ability's level. Finally, it will also add some duration to monsters
summoned by spells so it may be a good idea to use this ability after casting
a summoning spell. Monsters affected by this will be marked with the
"Morale Boost" effect, so this ability is not cumulative with the
Morale Boost spell.

4. Charming Demeanor(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your charisma by 10%
Extra points: +10% additional charisma bonus

This passive ability adds some percentile bonus to your charisma. Charisma
helps improve songs in many ways, and allows summoned monsters to fight
more effectively. Also, you get a store discount for high charisma, and may
be able to unlock some extra dialogue options, which may yield nice rewards.

5. Sotto Voce(Active, level 1)

Effect: Teleport all friendly monsters to the area around you, assuming
        they are within a certain distance.
Maximum distance: 20
Extra points: +20 to maximum distance.

This ability allows you to teleport all your friendly monsters around you.
This may be useful if you use a phase door or teleportation scroll or get
separated from them, because your monsters will not always follow you,
and may instead decide to keep attacking your enemies. Note that since
dungeons are never wider than 198 grid tiles, placing more than 10 points
in this ability will not improve it. This ability does not work outside of
normal dungeon levels.

6. Lore of the Bard(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Gain a bonus to intelligence and wisdom based on your base charisma.
Bonus to intelligence/wisdom: 10% of base charisma.
Extra points: +10%

This passive ability increases your intelligence and wisdom stats based on
your charisma. This can make it easier for a charisma-oriented character
to also become a good arcane or divine spellcaster, especially if you plan
on casting expensive monster summoning spells.

7. Bardic Reputation(Passive, level 6)

Effect: You become renowned across the land, which has many effects.
Extra points: Improve the effects mentioned below:

- For every point in this ability, 5 points are added to your charisma
for the purpose of unlocking new dialogue options. Being famous, people
will be more receptive to your words.
- For every point in this ability, 2 points are added to your charisma for
the purpose of obtaining discounts in stores.
- For every point of alignment above or below 0, you gain a 1% bonus to your
base charisma per point, because your reputation will be greater if you are
known as a hero or villain.
- Monsters in a range of 5 or less from you must win a mind-based saving throw,
or become scared. The power of this effect is 2 per point for every different
kind of monster you defeat within a particular monster kind
(with a maximum of 30 per point), as you become gradually known as a slayer
of that kind. The duration is 2, +1 for each member of that particular kind
you've slain. Note that the power is based on the number of different kinds
you've slain. For example, killing a Small Kobold and a Kobold Infantry
gives this ability a power of 6 per point and a duration of 4. However,
killing 100 Small Kobolds and Kobold Infantries will not result in an increase
in the power of this ability. Uniques will always be immune, as
are fear resistant enemies. Also, monsters with a depth level of
0(town monsters) are not counted.

8. War Songs(Passive, level 6)

Effect: When singing a song, your melee and ranged attacks take your song's
        element. Also you receive a bonus to damages based on your Charisma.
Bonus to melee/ranged damages: (10% of Charisma)%
Extra points: +(10% of Charisma)% to damages.

This passive ability gives you bonus damages to melee and ranged attacks based
on your Charisma when a song is active. It will also change the elemental
attribute of your attacks if the song's element is an offensive element,
although to benefit from this bonus, the song's power must be at least equal
to the monster's depth level, and you must also have enough charisma to keep
the song active. These limitations only apply to the element change effect.
The bonus to damages is always available, as long as you have any songs active.

9. Enthralling Songs(Passive, level 6)

Effect: All offensive songs gain the potential to turn enemies into allies.
Power: 10
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +10 to charm effect power.

This passive ability will give your offensive songs the chance to turn enemies
into allies. This can be a useful way of having monsters on your side without
cutting down on your offense. The charmed monsters will remain on your side
until you leave the current dungeon level you are currently exploring.
Note that elites, bosses and uniques aren't affected.

10. Bardic Grandeur(Passive, level 10)

Effect: When singing a song, your performance is so majestic that enemies
        will have a lot of trouble hurting you.
Extra points: Improve the abilities mentioned below.

- Increase your to_ac bonus by (20% of Charisma)% per point.
- Adds (10% of Charisma)% to any Magic Defense rolls.
- If an enemy uses any attack of the same element as your current song, a test
of this ability's power versus the monster's level and mind is performed.
If you win, the attack will be negated. The ability's power is 25% of your
Charisma per point. Note that the song's power must be at least equal to
the monster's depth.

HIGH MAGE
-----------

1. Increased Mana(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your maximum mana by 10%
Extra points: +10% additional mana bonus

This passive ability adds some percentile bonus to your mana. It is very 
similar to the warrior's Increased Life ability in concept. If you decide
to play a pure spellcaster type character, then this ability will become
very useful to create the most powerful spells. You may want to raise the
mage's Mana Boost early in the game, and when you change to High-Mage
start placing points in this ability. This way, the bonus you get from
Increased Mana will apply to the bonus from Mana Boost.

2. Magic Blood(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your mana recovery rate.
Mana Recovery: +1% of total mana.
Additional recovery: +5
Extra points: +1% to mana recovery.
              +5 to additional recovery.

This passive ability allow you to recover your mana at a faster rate.
Should you decide to invest some points into it, it can become very useful,
especially since it can turn some spells into free spells. If you can get
your hands on several powerful mana boosting items, you could decide to
put less points into Increased Mana and more into this. Or, you could
have a lower mana but use this ability to recover it faster.

3. Reflect Magic(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Reflect enemy spells back at them with increased power. Prevents
	any damages to you in the process.
Damage taken: Damages of original spell.
Reflect Power: 20
Extra points: +1 multiplier to returned original spell damages.
              +20 to return's power.

This passive ability allow you to reflect enemy magic spells right back at
them with increased power. When struck by an enemy's spell, there will be
a test between this ability's power versus the monster's level and mind
stat. If you win, you will reflect the spell, and you won't take any damages
from it. This ability is applied before the "reflect" ability of items.

4. Archmage Spirit(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase the number of spells you can create.
Extra spells: 1
Extra points: +1 extra spell for every 5 points.

This passive ability increase the number of spells you can create.
Normally, you cannot create more than 12 spells, but if you place a few
points in this ability, you can increase the number of spells. This can
be very useful if you find yourself lacking some spells with only 12
slots. But before placing several points into this, remember that there
you can always create multi-effect spells, and that sometimes it is
better to create a multi-effect spell than using more than one slot.

5. Counter Spell(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Gives you a chance to stop an enemy's spell.
Counter Power: 20
Extra points: +20 to Counter's power.

This passive ability gives you a chance to stop an enemy's spell. When
an enemy cast a spell, you will be prompted to use this ability or not.
If you choose to do so, there will be a test between this ability's power
versus the monster's level and mind stat. If you win, you will cancel
the enemy's magic spell. This works not only against offensive spells, but
any spells, such as summoning, haste, healing, and even some special, unique
spells more powerful monsters may have.

6. Empower Spells(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Improve the power of your offensive spells.
Bonus to spell power: 10%
Extra points: +10% power increase.

This passive ability allow you to empower the effect of all your offensive
spells. If you are a pure damages-dealing mage, this can be very useful
since it makes your magic spells a lot more powerful. This applies to any
damages dealing spells, but also to the reduce hit rate/defense effects
of Alteration, as well as Conjuration's damages fields.

7. School Focus: Elemental(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Reduce the creation cost of elemental spells.
Cost reduction: 1%
Additonal cost reduction: 3
Extra points: +1% cost reduction(up to a maximum of 75%).
		+3 additional cost reduction.

This passive ability will make the creation cost of Elemental spells
cheaper, allowing you to create more powerful spells for a lesser amount
of mana. The Elemental school of spells specialise exclusively in direct
attack spells. Choose this ability if you enjoy creating powerful and
devastating spells of destruction.

8. School Focus: Alteration(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Reduce the creation cost of alteration spells.
Cost reduction: 1%
Additonal cost reduction: 3
Extra points: +1% cost reduction(up to a maximum of 75%).
		+3 additional cost reduction.

This passive ability will make the creation cost of Alteration spells
cheaper, allowing you to create more powerful spells for a lesser amount
of mana. The Alteration school of spells include various disabling and
status inflicting spells, such as spells that reduce hit rate, defense,
level, speed or scare enemies away. Also include positive alterations,
such as stats boosting spells, physical and magic resistance and extra
bonus to AC. If you like this kind of spells, then this ability is for you.

9. School Focus: Conjuration(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Reduce the creation cost of conjuration spells.
Cost reduction: 1%
Additonal cost reduction: 3
Extra points: +1% cost reduction(up to a maximum of 75%).
		+3 additional cost reduction.

This passive ability will make the creation cost of Conjuration spells
cheaper, allowing you to create more powerful spells for a lesser amount
of mana. The Conjuration school of spells offer spells that can summon
creatures or items to help you. Also contains spells that create elemental
fields that damage enemies. If you enjoy summoning monsters or creating
powerful elemental fields, focusing in Conjuration might be a good idea.

10. Spell Mastery(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Gives +2 to spellcraft skill, and all specialized spells skills.
Extra points: +2 additional points to skills.

This passive ability gives you a bonus to spellcraft, but also to all other
magic skills. If you wish to gain more power and versatility as a caster,
this can be extremely useful.

ELEMENTAL LORD
----------------

1. <Element> Knight(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Your base strength and base weapon skills provides bonus to your
        intelligence and Elemental skill, while your base intelligence
        and base Elemental skill provide bonus to strength and weapon skills.
Bonus to Strength: 33% of base Intelligence.
Bonus to Intelligence: 33% of base Strength.
Bonus to weapon skills: 10% of base Elemental skill.
Bonus to Elemental: 10% of base weapon skills.
Extra points: +33% to stats bonus.
              +10% to skills bonus.
              With 10 or more points, your strength will be added to your
              intelligence and wisdom for the purpose of overcoming magic
              blocking counters. This applies to all magic spells and abilities.

This passive ability will allow you to easily balance strength and intelligence,
so that you will become skilled at both melee combat and spellcasting. The stats
bonus is rather high, meaning that this ability will not only help balancing
the two stats, but make them higher overall. There is also a bonus to skills,
which will complement the stats bonus. With 10 or more points, strength
will be added to intelligence to help overcoming enemies magic blocking counters.

2. <Element> Strike(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: A close-range magic attack that does elemental damages.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Elemental Type: Chosen element.
Extra points: +15% to damages.
              +1 to radius every 10 points.

This ability is treated as a magic attack, meaning it doesn't require a hit rate
test to hit enemies, and isn't blocked by melee blocking counters. However,
magic blocking counters can block it and intelligence will be required to
overcome them. Also, unlike most magic attacks, this attack isn't affected by
Spellcraft, since melee damages are already very high, but does gain radius
with enough points. Magic returning enemies will not return damages from
this ability.

3. Shield Of <Element>(Active, level 1)

Effect: Absorb all damages from the chosen element. Also deals elemental
	damages to all monsters who would attack you with melee attacks.
Damages: 30/(Int - 5)
Type: Varie
Duration: 10
Extra points: +30 damages/(Int - 5).
              +1 to duration.

This ability allow you to create a magical shield around you that will cause
elemental damages to melee attackers, as well as making you immune to your
chosen element. Unlike most non-spells magical abilities, this one is also
affected by Elemental, so if you want to raise damages, Elemental is a better
skill to use than Spellcraft. Magic damages caused by this ability will not
be returned by magic returning enemies.

4. <Element> Weapon(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Change a melee weapon's element type to your chosen element. When
        wielding a melee weapon of your chosen element, you gain additional
        mana.
Mana bonus: (Weapon's maximum base damages * 3).
Extra points: +1 multiplier to mana bonus.
              With 10 or more points, if you wield a weapon of your chosen
              element, damages rolls from it will be added to the base power
              of elemental spells of your chosen element.

This ability serves two purposes. One, to be able to have a melee weapon of
your chosen element all the time. And two, to be able to gain extra mana
when wielding it. Since elemental lords are also melee warriors, this means
they will need strength and heavy armor, which can affect their ability to
use a lot of mana. This ability will make up for it. If you are dual-wielding,
you will gain mana from both weapons. Finally, if you have 10 or more points,
it can also provide a nice bonus to your spells damages.

5. Piercing Spells: <Element>(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Spells and abilities of your chosen element bypass enemy abilities.
        Can also be activated to make enemies vulnerable to your element.
Chance to bypass Halve Damages ability: 20%
Chance to bypass Magic Returning ability: 10%
Chance to bypass Magic Immune ability: 2%
Piercing power for vulnerability: 30
Can be resisted: Yes(vulnerability).
Radius(vulnerability): 2
Extra points: +20% chances to bypass Halve Damages.
		+10% chances to bypass Magic Returning resistances.
		+2% chances to bypass Magic Immune ability.
                +30 to vulnerability's power.
                +1 to radius every 10 points.

This passive ability gives your spells and magic attacks a chance to bypass
the enemy's abilities that might prevent your spells from working. This ability 
can benefit greatly to pretty much any characters who uses some kind of magic 
attacks or spells. These monsters abilities are the bane of many characters, 
and raising this ability can be a good way to give you a chance to actually 
defeat a boss that might be otherwise impossible to kill.

Also, this ability has an activated effect as well. When you activate this
ability, you can attack an enemy with a curse that will make it vulnerable
to your chosen element, ignoring the enemy's resistances. This can be resisted
however, and it's based on this ability's level versus the monster's level
and mind stat.

6. Aura Of <Element>(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Damages enemies around you as you move or pass a turn.
Damages: 30/(Int - 5)
Element Type: Chosen element.
Radius: 2
Extra points: +30 damages/(Int - 5)
              +1 to radius for every 10 points.

This passive ability will cause damages to enemies around you as you move.
This can be useful to deal damages to surrounding enemies. Unlike most
non-spell elemental magic attacks, this one is enhanced by your
Elemental skill, so it's better to use that instead of Spellcraft.
Also, damages will not be returned by magic returning enemies.
NOTE: When you gain this ability, it will not automaticly activate.
To activate, use "Turn on your aura.". Use it again to turn it off. Useful
for preventing your pets from being hurt.

7. Command <Element>(Active, level 6)

Effect: Exerce control over enemies related to your chosen element. You can
	Paralyze, Dominate, Sleep, Confuse or Scare them.
Power: (Monster's resistance / 4)
Radius: 3
Duration(Paralyze, Confusion, Fear): 10 (3 for Uniques)
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: +(Monster's resistance / 4) to power.
              +1 to radius for every 20 points.

This ability allows you to inflict one of five different status ailments to
creatures related to your chosen element, which is determined based on their
resistances. The more resistant to your element, the more difficult it will
be for them to resist this ability. Though this ability can be resisted
though the level and mind stat of enemies, it will ignore normal resistances
to these ailments. Note that Elites, Bosses and Uniques are more resistant.
Also note that Dominate will only work if the monster has no more extra lives
left. On Uniques, Dominate will become Paralyze instead. This ability will
not work on enemies with less than 4% resistance.

8. Wave Of <Element>(Active, level 6)

Effect: An elemental chain attack that can hit multiple enemies in a row.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Type: Varie
Range: 30
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 to radius every 20 points.

This ability allow you to cast a wave of elemental energy that is based
on your weapon damages. It is a magical attack, but like other Elemental Lord
abilities, they will not be returned by magic returning enemies. When it
gain radius, it will strike enemies more than once, making it very powerful.
This ability is not affected by Spellcraft or Elemental. Damages are solely
based on melee damages.

9. Absorb Elemental Energy(Passive, level 6)

Effect: You have a chance of absorbing enemies magic attacks, and get healed
        instead of damaged.
Power: 20
Power against chosen element: 60
Extra points: +20 to power.
              +60 to power against chosen element.

This passive ability gives you a chance that when struck by an enemy's magic
attacks, you will get healed instead of damaged. The chance is based on
this ability's power versus the monster's level and mind stat. If the attack
is of your chosen element, the chance to absorb it is higher. Note that
Physical, Missile and Ice elements cannot be absorbed. This also only works
for attacks that shares a type with the Elemental school. Enemies' Life Blasts,
for example, will not be absorbed.

10. Mastery Of <Element>(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Damages from your chosen element are augmented.
Bonus damages: +10%
Extra points: +10% damages.

This passive ability allow you to increase elemental damages from ANY sources,
melee, ranged or magical. The bonus adds itself as multiplicative, so it can
significantly raise your damages.

MONSTER MAGE
--------------

1. Monster Magics(Active, level 1)

Effect: Allow you to learn and use monster magics.
Extra points: +50% to monster magics damages.
	      Increased chance of learning the monster magic.

This ability is the main spellcasting power of the Monster Mage class. 
This ability replaces the 'm' command with it's very own spellcasting
system. Monster Mages can naturally cast and learn monster magics,
but other classes will need at least one point in this ability.
To learn a monster magic, the monster must cast the spell, and if it's
an offensive spell, you must survive it. If you do, then you will be 
prompted whether or not you want to learn the spell. If you say yes, 
you will then attempt to learn the spell. The success rate depends on 
the spell's casting cost versus your Monster Magics ability. If you
succeed, you will be able to learn the spell, and place it in one
of your 15 monster magics slots.

Compared to normal magic, monster magics have the advantage of being
very diverse, and generally less expensive. The drawback is that you
have less freedom over exactly what you will get, it all depends on
the monsters you are facing. Also, monster magics generally have lower
damages than regular magic, so make sure you raise the Monster Magics
ability a lot if you plan on focusing on Monster Magic.

Remember that once you get this ability, you will gain the ability to 
switch between monster magics and regular spells, so if you need a spell 
to back you up, you can have it! Also, you will have the option to turn
on and off the learning of monster magics, in case you do not want to
learn anything new.

2. Morphing Abilities(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Allow you to turn into a monster.
Maximum monster depth: 2
Maximum monster level: 3
Extra points: +2 to maximum monster depth.
		+3 to maximum monster level.
		+50% to morphed powers damages.

This ability allow you to turn into a monster of your choice. You
gain the ability to 'Memorize' a creature. Once you memorize a
creature, you can assume it's shape at any times, for as long as
you wish. You will then be able to use their various powers. Like
your regular monster magics, monsters breaths are their strongest
powers, and are based on your current hp. Unlike your regular
shape, your hp will not be calculated using your constitution,
but using your level, so you don't need a high constitution if
you plan to morph a lot. Note that life boosting abilities
will not affect your hp while morphed, it is entirely based
on your level and which monster you are morphing into. If you plan 
on morphing a lot, raising your Martial Arts skill is needed 
in order to fight in melee effectively. Monsters with stronger 
melee attacks will, of course, make you much more effective in 
combat.
WARNING: If you use elemental melee attacks, magic returning
monsters WILL return damages!!

3. Constitution(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your constitution by 5%
Extra points: +5% additional constitution bonus

This passive ability adds some percentile bonus to your constitution.
This ability can allow your constitution to reach very high scores,
meaning you will get much more hp. This is a very useful ability for
any classes, and it is especially useful to Monster Mages, as it
helps them survive magical attacks to learn them. It is up to you to decide
how much hp you need, but generally, it's a good idea to have a lot
of it later in the game.

4. Monstrous Leadership(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your Leadership skill while morphed.
Bonus to Leadership: +3
Extra points: +3 to Leadership skill.

This passive ability increases your Leadership skill while being
morphed. This is a very useful ability if you plan on using a lot
of summoned creatures to defeat your foes. Of course, being only
effective while morphed, you have to build your character
accordingly should you decide to focus in this ability. A monster
with summoning abilities is the best choice to use with this
ability. Since there are less of those monsters early in the
game, you may wish to wait before placing points in this.

5. Monstrous Martial Arts(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your Martial Arts skill while morphed.
Bonus to Martial Arts: +2
Extra points: +2 to Martial Arts skill.

This passive ability increases your Martial Arts skill while being
morphed. If morphing is your trade, then this ability will increase
your melee fighting ability a lot. Unarmed monster attacks are
greatly affected by your Martial Arts skill, and morphing into a
monster with better attacks will result is much greater damages.

6. Dominate Monster(Active, level 1)

Effect: Make a monster friendly toward you.
Can be resisted: Yes
Extra points: Increased success rate.

This ability allow you to turn a monster into an ally. This can be
a very useful way of making a monster join should it be too tough
to defeat otherwise, especially if your Leadership skill is good.
If you like this ability, you may want to consider the Monstrous
Leadership ability to easily raise your Leadership skill. This
ability does not work on uniques, elites and bosses. Also, if the
enemy has any extra lives, you must first reduce them to 0 before
using Dominate Monsters, or it will not work.

7. Monstrous Defense(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Gives you a bonus to your base AC while morphed.
Bonus to base AC: +10% of Morphed creature's base AC
Extra points: +10% of Morphed creature's base AC.

This passive ability gives you a bonus to your AC. Because many
monsters are restricted in their equipment, and therefore you can't
always have a good armor while morphed, this ability can largely 
make up for it. It raises your base AC, so Agility skill will help
making the bonus even higher. The bonus depends on the creature
you morphed into. If you morph into a creature with higher base AC,
you will get a higher bonus to your base AC.

8. Monstrous Wave(Active, level 6)

Effect: Emits a wave of energy that can damage multiple enemies.
Damages: Chosen melee attack damages(Martial Arts bonus applies).
Type: Depends on attack's type.
Range: 5
Extra points: +20% to damages.

This ability allow you to throw a short-ranged wave of energy at
your enemies. It is a chain attack, and thus can hit multiple
enemies. The damages are based on the melee attack you choose,
and the type varies depending on the attack's type. If you
wish to use this ability, make sure your Martial Arts skill is high,
as it will greatly raise the damages done by this ability.

9. Monstrous Brutality(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Your melee attacks damages enemy hit rate and defense.
Amount: 300
Extra points: +300 to hit rate and defense loss.

This passive ability makes your unarmed attacks more effective by
giving them the ability to cut trough an enemy's defense and hit
rate, making them easier to hit, and they will have a harder time
hitting you. It can be very useful if your own defense or hit
rate is not too high, or if you just want to get an edge over
powerful foes. Uniques, elites and bosses, while affected, will 
only lose 10% the amount a normal enemy would lose. Note that
you need to perform a successful hit rate test to actually hit
with this ability, and it is done separatly from the normal
melee attack. Even if you attack with magical damages, you need
to perform the test for this ability to trigger.

10. Monstrous Life Force(Passive, level 10)

Effect: You gain extra hp while morphed.
Hp bonus: +3%
Extra points: +3% to hp.

This passive ability will give you even more hp while morphed into
a monster. Monsters can get a very high hp, and with this ability,
you can get an even higher one! If you play as a tough monster such
as a dragon or golem, you can get a very, very high hp with enough
points in this ability.

DEFENDER
----------

1. Heavy Armored Defense(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your to_ac bonus while wearing hard or dragon armor.
	Also make the armor more effective.
AC bonus: Base armor defense * 5.
Armor improvement: Armor's base AC treated as 2% higher.
Extra points: +((Base armor defense * 5)) to AC.
              +2% to base AC increase.

This passive ability makes your heavy armors more effective by giving
you an AC bonus based on it. This can be very useful, especially if
you get a high defense, special armor, in which case your AC can
become very high should this ability be high enough. Since this is
a bonus to_ac, you might want to consider combining it with a scroll
of blessing or the Holy Might ability to maximize it's potential.

2. Armored Spellcasting(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Gain mana based on your heavy or dragon armor's base AC, and reduce
	the penalities of wearing any pieces of armor for spellcasting.
Mana gained: Heavy or dragon armor's base AC.
Mana penality reduction: 10%
Extra points: +1 multiplier to mana gained.
		+10% penality reduction. From 10 points and higher, the mana
		halving penality of gloves is gone, and the penality becomes
		a bonus. (so with 11+ points, you get an increase of mana for
		wearing heavy armor)

Normally, heavy armor is an hindrance for mana-based spellcasters.
But with this ability, you can not only cancel the penality, but actually
turn heavy armor into something good for mana casting! If you plan on
casting spells and wear heavy armor, consider this ability.

3. Shield Bash(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Does physical damages and sends the enemy away.
Physical Damages: Shield's defense/(Str - 5). Then increased by to_d%. Then
		  by Strength%.
Distance: 2
Extra points: +(Shield's defense)/(Str - 5) physical damages.
              +1 to distance for every 20 points.

This ability allow you to deal some physical damages to enemies while
sending them away, keeping you out of harm's way. The main use of this
ability is of course to keep the enemy away, but should you get a
strong shield and a high multiplier, it can also become a fairly
good damage dealing attack, and it can be used safely against damages
returning bosses.

4. Shield Mastery(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Improve your combat abilities when using a shield.
Bonus to_hit and to_dam: +30
Bonus Defense: 10% of shield's base AC.
Bonus to initial blocking power: +5
Extra points: +30 to_hit and to_dam.
		+10% of shield's base AC to Defense.
		+5 to initial blocking power.
		With 10 or more points, you can block magic attacks.

This passive ability gives you multiple bonuses to your combat abilities
while using a shield. Shields are useful as they give you a chance to
block any incoming attacks even before a regular hit rate test is made.
This ability will make shields even better by giving you various bonus
when wielding one. If you dual wield shields, though you'll get a base
block power increase on both, the other bonus will only apply once.

5. Defensive Evasion(Passive, level 1)

Effect: A percentage of your base Defense is added to Agility and Magic Defense.
Bonus: 5% of base Defense skill to Agility and Magic Defense.
Extra points: +5% of base Defense added to Agility and Magic Defense.

This passive ability allow you to get a bonus to Agility and Magic Defense
based on your baseDefense skill. Normally, for a perfect defense, it is best
to spread skill points between the three skills. However, with this
ability, you can focus on only Defense and make it much higher than usual
for maximum defense, or raise only Defense to the usual amount, and then
place the points you would have placed in Agility or Magic Defense into
other skills instead. Note that only your base Defense will be counted for
the bonus(that is, the total number of natural skill points spent in the skill).
Bonus from race, class or items will not apply.

6. Great Guard(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Absorb great damages. You may get confused in the process.
Reduction: Damages are divided by this ability's level.
Extra reduction: 20% of total AC.
Extra points: +20% of total AC to reduction.

This ability allow you to absorb damages from any sources, which can be 
anything: a melee attack, a spell or even damages from traps or 
any other sources. This ability is very powerful, however, there is a 
chance that if you use it, you may end up confused. Whenever you would 
take damages, you will be asked whether or not you want to guard these 
damages. If you do, they will be reduced by a certain amount depending
on how much points you invested in Great Guard. When you use great
guard, you have 20% chance of getting confused if you use it again.
If you use it again, another 20% is added, and so on. The chance
of getting confused is reduced by 1 every turns.

7. Armored Health(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Gain an hp bonus while wearing hard or dragon armor.
Hp bonus: armor's AC * 3.
Extra points: +((armor's AC * 3)) to hp.

This passive ability gives you a bonus to your maximum hp equal to your
armor's AC value. Should you decide to invest some points in this
ability, it can become very effective, especially if you have a hard
armor with a very high defense. If you want to place your stat points
in Strength rather than Constitution, this can be a good way to
compensate for your hp.

8. Defensive Strike(Active, level 6, combat feat)

Effect: A melee attack that adds your Defense skill as if it was Fighting.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Extra points: +20% to damages.

Defensive Strike allow you to do a melee attack that will treat your
Defense skill as if it was additional points in Fighting, therefore
turning your Defense skill into an offensive skill. This allows you to
focus more on Defense skill while still having good melee power.

9. Boomerang Shield(Active, level 6)

Effect: Throw your shield to deal physical damages.
Damages: (Shield's AC + shield's to_ac) * Throwing Skill. To_d and Strength
         are then applied.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to damages(before to_d and strength).

This ability allow you to use your shield as an offensive ranged
weapon. This ability is a useful ranged attack that you can use as
many times as you want, and it can also be used to defeat physical
returning bosses from a safe distance. If you plan on using this
ability, make sure you have a good Throwing skill, as it will make
this ability a lot more powerful.

10. Armored Might(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Gain strength based on your armor's base AC value.
Strength bonus: 10% of armor's base AC.
Extra points: +10% of armor's base AC to strength.

This passive ability allow you to gain strength based on yourarmor's base
AC. This can result in very high strength if you wear armors with high AC
values. Note that this ability will only work with hard armors and dragon
armors. It does not work with soft armors.

High Monk
-------

1. Energy Spin(Active, level 1)

Effect: A spin kick attack that does magical damages.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Radius: 2
Type: Mana
Extra points: +40% to damages.
              +1 to radius for every 20 points.

This ability is similar to the Spin Kick monk ability, except it
does mana type damages. If you have a very high Martial Arts skill, 
this ability can be extremely useful and powerful. Not only will 
it deal damages to monsters immune to physical, it won't be 
affected by the high level monsters resistance to physical damages. 
And finally, it will gain radius if you place many points.
Unlike Spin Attack, it cannot be used as a combat feat, but does
a lot more damages.

2. Ki Blast(Active, level 1)

Effect: Throw a powerful wave of energy at your enemies.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Range: 10
Type: Mana
Extra points: +50% to damages.
              +1 to range for every two points.

This ability will throw a wave of energy that is based on your
to_damage bonus. This is a very powerful ability that can deal
a lot of damages if your Martial Arts skill is high enough.
Having a high spellcraft skill can also help raising the
damages of this ability.

3. Arms Crush(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Block an enemy attack, and crush it's arms(or claws).
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Extra points: +5% to damages.
              Improved chance of breaking arms.

This passive ability will allow you to interrupt an enemy's
attack, and break it's arms(or other form of physical attack).
This will give them the "Mutilate Arms" status, which mean
they won't be able to attack anymore. The chance to hit is
dependant on your to_hit, and if you place more points in
this ability, you will have a higher chance of breaking
arms. This ability will not work against elites, bosses
and uniques, or if you are wielding a weapon.

4. Energy Punch(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: A very powerful punch attack that does magical damages.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Type: Mana
Extra points: +20% to damages.

This ability will deliver a punch of great power to your enemies.
Plus, it does mana-type damages, so only elites and bosses resistant
or immune to all magical attacks will resist it. It never miss,
and can become very powerful if you place many points.

5. Legs Breaking Throw(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Grab an enemy, disable it's legs, and throw it away.
Damages: Base unarmed damages.
Distance: 3
Can be resisted: Yes(legs breaking only, monster's strength is used
                 instead of mind.)
Extra points: +5% to damages.
              Allow you to throw heavier enemies.

This ability allow you to grab an enemy and throw it away, while
breaking it's legs. It will also deal some damages, although this
shouldn't be used as a main damaging ability, but rather as a
defensive ability against stronger monsters. Elites, bosses and
uniques cannot have their legs broken, but they can be thrown
like any other monsters.

6. Disabling Blows(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Unarmed attacks reduce hit rate, defense and speed.
Hit Rate and Defense reduction: 15
Speed reduction: 1
Extra points: +15 hit rate and defense reduction.
              +1 speed reduction for every two points.

This passive ability allow all your unarmed attacks to reduce
hit rate, defense and speed of your enemies. This can be very
useful, as if you don't kill your enemies, they won't be able
to counter-attack as easily, and they might not do it at all.
This will not work on bosses immune to physical attacks, nor
will it work against uniques, but it works against anything
else.

7. Energize Self(Active, level 6)

Effect: Restore hp, mana, and cure all bleeding.
Hp healed: 10/(Wis - 5)
Mana healed: 5/(Wis - 5)
Extra points: +2 hp healed/(Wis - 5).
              +1 mana healed/(Wis - 5) for every two points.

This ability allow you to restore both your hp, mana and cure
all bleeding you may have. This ability is clearly better than
the priest's Heal, however, it is also A LOT harder to obtain
than the other one. If you don't actually need the mana healing,
or don't wish to build a High Monk character, the priest's heal
will probably be enough to do the job.

8. Dual Wave Fist(Active, level 6)

Effect: Throw two waves of energy, which can be thrown in any
	direction.
Damages: Half of base unarmed damages.
Range: 10
Type: Mana
Extra points: +5% to damages.

This ability allow you to throw two waves of energy, which can
be thrown in any directions. This is great if there are two
powerful enemies, and you want to strike them both in the same
move. And if there are more than one enemy in a direction,
this can also be very useful. You could also throw both energy 
waves at one enemy, if there is only one, very powerful enemy.

9. Gather Power(Active, level 6)

Effect: Briefly gather a lot of power to deliver a mighty blow.
Bonus to Strength: +20
Duration: 2
Extra points: +20 to Strength.

This ability allow you to briefly raise your strength to deliver
a very powerful attack. It takes one move, but your next attack
will more than make up for it. You won't be able to do more than
one attack, but it might be enough to kill your foe.

10. Legendary Agility(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Raises your Agility skill, improve dodging.
Bonus to Agility skill: +3
Bonus to dodge: 1%
Extra points: +3 to Agility skill.
              +1% chance to dodge(up to a maximum of 75%).

This passive ability not only gives a huge boost to your agility
skill, it will also increase your chance of dodging enemy blows.
With your Martial Arts skill high enough, you get a 25% chance to
dodge blows. With this ability, it can get even higher. This is
a very good ability to combine with the Monk's Unarmored Combat,
or if you just want the dodge bonus to complement your dodging.

SOUL GUARDIAN
---------------

1. Soul Power(Active, level 1)

Effect: Draw magical powers from a captured soul.
Extra points: Offensive/Healing power: +50%.

This ability allow you to use magical powers from a captured
soul. The spells available are those that the monster was able
to use. Soul Powers are casted wisdom-based, and uses the same
rules as normal wisdom spellcasting. The Priest's Improved Wisdom
Casting will also help you with Soul Power. Note that if you used
another ability that requires the soul to recharge, you cannot
use it to cast spells until it recharges.

2. Simulacrum(Active, level 1)

Effect: Recreate a creature from a soul.
Hp: Monster's hp roll * level
Level: ((Wis - 5) / 2)
Number: 1
Duration: 5
Extra points: +1 creature for every 10 points.
		+2 to level.
		+1 to duration for every 4 points.

This ability allow you to reincarnate a monster from a soul.
This ability can a very powerful source of friendly
creatures, as it possesses many advantages over a regular
summon spell. With many points in it, the level can become
extremely high, and so can the hp of the creature. Also,
for every 10 points, you get to summon another creature.
Also, you can place the creature anywhere you want, so you
can place it in many strategic spots. However, when you use
this ability, your soul will need to recharge itself for
10 turns, so you cannot use this ability immediately after
with the same soul. If you plan on using this ability, make 
sure you have a high charisma and leadership skill.

3. Soul Bind(Active, level 1)

Effect: Bind a soul to an non-magical item to make it magical.
Maximum item's depth: 3
Extra points: +3 to maximum item's depth.

By using this ability, you can bind a monster's soul to an
item, so it will gain new abilities. The abilities gained
depends on the original abilities of the monster. For
instance, if you bind the soul of a light resistant monster,
your item will provide you with light resistance, as well
as a light source. If the monster was using fire melee
attacks, a weapon will gain fire brand. If the monster has
very strong melee attacks, it will enhance your weapons
base damages. It all depends on which soul you use to create 
the item. Note that once bound, you will lose the captured
soul.

4. Sealing Light(Active, level 1)

Effect: Seal monsters actions.
Radius: 5
Duration: 10
Can be resisted: Yes(soul's depth is used instead of ability's level)
Extra points: +1 to duration for every 2 points.
		+1 to radius for every 20 points.
		Improved success rate(+20% to soul's depth).

This ability allow you to seal actions of a monster by using
a soul. When using this ability, there will be a test between
the monster's level and mind versus the soul's depth. If you are
successful, the monster will become completely paralyzed for the
duration of the ability. When using this ability, the soul will
need to recharge for 5 turns. Elites, bosses and uniques, while
not immune, will be harder to seal. Main questors are immune to it.

5. Soul Boost(Active, level 1)

Effect: Gain extra wisdom for your next spell.
Wisdom bonus: Soul's mind.
Duration: 2
Extra points: +10% to wisdom bonus.

This ability allow you to gain additional wisdom to empower your next
attack. This can be useful if you have a spell that is too difficult
to cast, or if you just want more power to your spells. Note that when
using this ability, the soul will need to recharge for 15 turns.

6. Soul Guide(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your wisdom and charisma.
Amount: 3%
Extra points: +3% to wisdom and charisma.

This passive ability allow you to raise both your wisdom and
charisma by a fair amount. While you won't gain as much as
the pure stats enhancing abilities, this one will raise two
of them by a good amount. This can be useful if you are
using lots of summoned creatures, and want access to a greater
amount of skill points.

7. Soul Strike(Active, level 6, combat feat)

Effect: A soul-empowered melee attack that does magic damages.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Additional damages: Soul's hp.
Type: Missile
Extra points: +10% to additional damages.

This ability allow you to strike with a melee attack that does
pure magic damages. When using this ability, you will be asked to
choose a soul. Once chosen, it will add an amount of damages equal
to the soul's hp. Soul Guardians are not warriors, and this ability
is good in that it doesn't require a great weapon skill to be
useful. So if you have multiple blows and a some points in combat 
feats skill, it can deal quite a bit of damages. The damages are
done are of the Missile type, both physical and magical.

8. Soul Shield(Active, level 6)

Effect: Gain bonus AC and magic resistance from a soul.
AC Bonus: Soul's base AC.
Magic Resistance: Half of soul's depth.
Duration: 10
Extra points: +1 multiplier to AC bonus.
		+1% of current magic resistance bonus.(max 75%)
		+1 to duration.

This ability allow you to temporarely protect yourself against
physical attacks by increasing your AC, and against magical attacks
by giving you magic resistance. To use it, you will need to select
a soul you captured. Depending on the soul, the amount of bonus
you will get will vary. This ability can be very useful, especially
since Soul Guardians have low hp, it will help reduce the damages
you receive. Note that when placing extra points, you will not
gain +1% magic resistance. Instead, the current bonus to magic
resistance will augment by 1%. This essencially mean that with 100
points in this ability, you will get twice the magic resistance.
When using this ability, the soul will need to recharge for as
long as the duration of the shield.

9. Soul Guard(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Use a soul to prevent great damages.
Reduction: Damages are divided by this ability's level.
Extra reduction: Soul's max hp
Extra points: +20% to extra reduction.

This ability allow you to prevent an enormous amount of damages
that might be dealt to you by using a soul. Similar to the Defender's
Great Guard, this ability can be used to stop any source of damages,
be it melee attacks, magic/breath attacks, traps or any other
sources. The more powerful the soul you use, the more you will
prevent. The soul will need to recharge for 60 turns.

10. Wrath Of Souls(Active, level 10)

Effect: Free a soul to unleash a powerful, destructive chain attack.
Damages: Soul's max hp.
Range: 30
Type: Mana
Radius: 2
Extra points: +1 multiplier to damages.
	      +1 to radius for every 30 points.

When using this powerful ability, you will need to sacrifice one of
your captured souls. This ability can be extremely devastating, but
the fact that you need to sacrifice a soul can make you hesitate to
use it often. However, it's very powerful, especially with high
spellcraft skill, and it's a radius chain attack, making it even
deadlier. Furthermore, the damages from this ability are NOT returned
by returning bosses, so that makes it even more useful, as you can
easily decimate entire hordes of enemies instantly. Use it wisely,
but if there is a large horde you can't defeat, this ability might
just be what you need.

SHADOW STALKER
----------------

1. Stealth Attack(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: When invisible trough a special ability(like Hide in Shadows),
	this attack adds your Stealth to your melee skills as if it
        was Fighting.
Damages: Normal attack damages(branded weapons are not counted)
Type: Weapon's damages type.
Extra points: +20% to damages.

This ability allow the Shadow Stalker to make a good use of his/her 
stealth, by treating it as Fighting during damages calculation. 
This ability also has the advantage of allowing you to use any 
weapons with only one skill. Note that this ability requires you to 
use a special ability to become invisible (like Hide or
Shadow Cloak). Items that grants invisibility does not allow you to
use this ability.

2. Displacement(Passive, level 1)

Effect: You appear as a displaced image, and you are difficult to hit.
Power: 25% of Stealth skill.
Extra points: +25% of Stealth skill to power.

This passive ability allow you to avoid attacks that normally requires
a hit rate roll to hit you. When attacked this way, a saving throw between
this ability and the monster's level and dexterity will be rolled.
If you win, you will take no damages. This is cumulative with the normal
AC test, making you much more difficult to hit with this.

3. Shadow Cloak(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Become temporarely invisible. Also has a passive effect in which
        you're invisible through a special ability, you gain a bonus to Stealth.
Invisibility strength: 20
Bonus to Stealth: 10%
Duration: 10
Extra points: +2 to duration.
              +3 to invisibility strength.
              +10% bonus to Stealth.

Shadow Cloak gives you temporary invisibility, and allow you to use
abilities such as Stealth Attack. It will also give you a bonus to
your Stealth skill for it's duration, improving many of the other
abilities.

4. Shadow Ball(Active, level 1)

Effect: When invisible, turn the shadows into a ball of darkness.
Damages: Stealth/(Dex - 5)
Type: Darkness
Radius: 2
Extra points: +20% to damages.
		+1 to radius for every 30 points.

This ability allow you to cast a ball of darkness at your enemies.
The damages are based entirely on your stealth skill, so if you want
this ability to be useful, you will need a high stealth skill. Also,
you need to be under a temporary invisibility spell or ability(such
as Hide in Shadows or Shadow Cloak) to be able to use this ability.
Spellcraft will help raising the damages of this ability.

5. Shadow Run(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your speed when invisible trough a special ability.
Speed increase: +1
Extra points: +1 to speed.

This ability allow you to become much faster when using a temporary
invisibility spell or ability. However, note that while the bonus to
speed of this ability seems quite high, it will never exceed your
invisibility's strength. So if you use Shadow Cloak and get an
invisibility strength of 3, the maximum speed bonus of this ability
will be 3. Placing some points in this ability will allow you to
get quite a bit faster, but don't invest too much if your
invisibility is not powerful.

6. Shadow Phase(Active, level 1, combat feat)

Effect: Allow you to teleport to an unlit grid.
Radius: 5
Extra points: +1 to radius for every points.

This ability allow you to teleport to an unlit grid of your choice,
within the ability's radius. This can be useful to escape dangerous
situations, but note that the fact that grids must be unlit make
it a risky ability, in that you never know what's on the grid you
teleport to. You cannot teleport on walls or monsters, so be aware
that this ability might not ALWAYS allow you to escape, unless you
know where you're going. Note that you cannot use this to teleport
inside vaults.

7. Dark Mist(Active, level 6)

Effect: Cover an area with a dark mist, making it harder for enemies
	to see and hit you, and making it easier for you to hit them.
Hit Rate penality: -25%
Defense penality: -25%
Chance of erratical move: 25%
Radius: 1
Extra points: +1 to radius for every five points.
		+1% hit rate/defense penality for every two points.
		+1% chance of erratical move.

This ability will create fields of dark mist. Enemies in the mist
will suffer from reduced hit rate and defense, and will move
erraticaly. If you have trouble hitting enemies, avoiding blows
or you simply want to confuse their ranks, this ability can be
very useful. Elites, bosses and uniques will not suffer from 
the erriatical moves, but will still be affected by the mist's 
penalities.

8. One With Shadows(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Become extremely agile, dextrous and receive bonus AC
	when invisible trough a special ability.
Bonus to agility skill: Stealth / 4
Bonus to dexterity: Stealth / 4
Bonus to AC: Stealth
Extra points: +10% to bonuses.

This passive ability will give you bonuses to agility, dexterity
and AC based on your Stealth skill when invisible trough a special
ability(such as Shadow Cloak or Hide in Shadows). This will make
you much more competent in combat, and if you wear a good armor,
combined with the AC bonus, it might give you a very good AC due
to the agility skill bonus.

9. Shadow Magic(Passive, level 6)

Effect: When you become invisible trough a special ability, gain
	a mana bonus based on your stealth skill, that may exceed
	your maximum mana.
Mana bonus: Stealth * 5
Extra points: +20% to mana bonus.

This passive ability will give you bonus mana when you become
invisible trough an ability, such as Shadow Cloak. This allow
you to potentially gain quite a good amount of mana without
raising your intelligence stat. When you become invisible,
you will immediatly gain the mana, and it can become higher
than your maximum mana. Note that once the invisibility ends,
your mana will return to it's maximum amount if it became
higher due to this ability.

10. Storm Of Shadow Edges(Active, level 10)

Effect: When invisible trough a special ability, attack within
        a short distance over a radius. Your Stealth is added
        to your intelligence and wisdom for the purpose of
        overcoming magic blocking counters.
Damages: Base weapon damages.
Range: 5
Radius: 1
Type: Darkness
Extra points: +20% to damages.
              +1 to radius every 10 points.

This ability allow you to select a point on the map. From this
point, a radius 1 darkness attack will occur, based on your
base weapon damages. This can not only be very powerful, but
it's also useful to defeat enemies immune to melee weapons.
Note that the weapon damages use regular weapon skills, and
not your stealth skill. Also, this attack is treated as a magical
attack.

GUNNER
--------

1. High-Velocity Fanning(Active, level 1)

Effect: Unload all your pistol's ammos in a high-speed, deadly pistol fanning.
Damages: Base gun damages.
Extra points: +10% to damages.

This ability allows you to fire your gun in an "automatic fire" mode,
until there is no more ammos left in it. This can be very powerful,
and as you put more points into this technique, you will also gain
extra damages, making it even more deadly. However, this technique
will consume your ammos very quickly, and should be used with care,
as there is no points in killing weak enemies with this ability, which
will only result in you losing ammos. This ability is best used against
powerful enemies that have a lot of hit points. Also, all shots are
considered regular shots, so ammo brands, elemental damages and most
other passive shooting abilities will apply. Note that this ability
can only be used with one-handed guns, and only with one gun at once.
Also, all shots will be fired in the same direction, you cannot spread
your shots.

2. Improved Stun Shots(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increases the success rate of the 'Stun Shots' feat.
Stun power increase: +20
Extra points: +20 to stun power.
		+1 to paralyze duration for every 10 points.

At firearms skill level 40, you gained a passive feat, 'Stun Shots', that
gives your shots a chance to paralyze enemies. This passive ability raise
the success rate of the stunning ability by increasing the power of the
stun, thus making the feat much harder to resist for your enemies. Even a few
points in this ability can make a difference, so if you want to get a high
chance to stun enemies with your shots, this ability can help a lot. 

3. Rifle Impact(Active, level 1)

Effect: Shoot your rifle with such an impact that all in an area of effect
        will be affected.
Damages: Base rifle damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Radius: 2
Extra points: +30% to damages.
              +1 maximum shots every 5 points.
              +1 to radius every 10 points.

This ability allows you to maximize the great impact of a rifle's fire, and use
it to create a powerful area of effect attack. This can be very useful to
defeat a large group of enemies, but if you invest many points into it, it can
also become a very powerful attack. All passive abilities you may have will
apply to the shot, and if your rifle already gives you an area of effect, it
will be increased even more. Note that this ability will only work with
rifles, that is, guns that requires two hands. It will not work with one-handed
pistols.

4. Point-Blank Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: A close range gun shot that is hard to avoid, and does lots of damages.
Damages: Base gun damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Bonus to_hit: +25%
Extra points: +50% to damages.
              +25% to bonus to_hit.
              +1 to maximum shots every 4 points.

This ability allows you to fire your gun at close combat range. Thanks to the
great speed of a gun's shots, a point-blank shot is much harder to avoid, and
the target will take much more impact from the shot, thus dealing lots of
damages. If you often find yourself in close combat with enemies, and you do
not want to use melee attacks, this can be a good alternative.

5. True Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: A shot that never miss.
Damages: Base gun damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 to maximum shots every 10 points.

This ability allows you to fire a shot that will never miss the target.
This will also bypass any counters the enemy may have. While the maximum
shots of this ability is lower than the other abilities, it can be very
useful if you want a guaranteed hit against an enemy that is hard to hit.

6. Dashing Shot(Active, level 1)

Effect: Shoot, then move in a direction.
Damages: Base gun damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Extra points: +10% to damages.
              +1 maximum shot every 10 points.

This ability allows you to shoot, then move in any directions. This can
be useful if you want to keep a safe distance from your foes while doing
damages at the same time. If you place enough points and gain additional
maximum shots, you will also be allowed to move more than once.

7. Firearms Specialization: Pistols(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Receive bonus when using pistols.
Bonus to_hit: +10%
Bonus damages: 10%
Bonus to base damages: 1
Extra points: +10% to_hit.
              +10% to bonus damages.

This passive ability makes you better at shooting with pistols. Should you
place a couple of points in this ability, all your shots, and all gun
abilities will become much stronger. Compared to rifles, pistols can be
dual-wielded, or you can wield a melee weapon and a pistol, or even a pistol
with a shield for extra defense. They are, however, weaker than the two-handed
rifles. Note that the hit rate bonus is only applied when you actually shoot,
and will not appear on your character's status screen.

8. Firearms Specialization: Rifles(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Receive bonus when using rifles.
Bonus to_hit: +10%
Bonus damages: 10%
Bonus to base damages: 1
Extra points: +10% to_hit.
              +10% to bonus damages.

This passive ability makes you better at shooting with rifles. Should you
place a couple of points in this ability, all your shots, and all gun
abilities will become much stronger. Compared to pistols, rifles are
two-handed, and therefore cannot be wielded in combination with a melee
weapon or a shield. They are, however, much stronger than pistols.
Note that the hit rate bonus is only applied when you actually shoot,
and will not appear on your character's status screen.

9. Magic Bullets(Active, level 6)

Effect: Create some magical bullets.
Duration: 10
Base damages: 3d3(bullets) or 3d5(rounds)
Bonus to_h: +5
Bonus to_d: +5
Mana cost: 5/bullets
Extra points: +1d1 to base damages for every 3 points.
              +2 to duration for every points.
              +5 to_d/to_h.

This ability allows you to create magical bullets to shoot at your enemies.
Since ammos for guns are rare, this ability can make up for it by providing
unlimited ammos. It does costs mana, so you may need to put a few points in
intelligence or wear intelligence/mana boosting items to have enough mana
to use this ability. Being magical in nature, the bullets will do Missile-type
damages. Note that this ability will look at the first available firearm in
your hands, and will create ammos accordingly. If wielding a pistol, it will
create bullets. If wielding a rifle, it will create rounds, which are slightly
stronger.

10. Immolating Shot(Active, level 10)

Effect: Shoots a fiery shot that will surround the enemy with flames.
Damages: Base gun damages.
Damages Type: Fire
Fire Fields Damages: 25% of damages.
Maximum shots: 1
Radius: 3
Extra points: +20% to damages.
              +1 maximum shots every 5 points.
              +1 to radius for every 10 points.

This ability allows you to shoot a shot that does fire damages to the target.
However, upon impact, it will also cause fire fields to appear around the
target, causing even more damages as the target moves. It can also be used
to burn an entire pack of enemies, or to kill a second swarm of enemies that
would be right behind the enemy you wanted to kill. Note that the fire fields
will only appear if the enemy is actually hit. The shot will also always do
fire damages, regardless of the ammo or gun you're using, but otherwise, all
other passive abilities will apply.

ENCHANTER
-----------

1. Craft Fighting(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Allows you to use your Crafting skill as a Fighting or Shooting skill
	when using enchanted crafted items.
Maximum skill used: 5
Extra points: +5 to maximum skill used.

This passive ability allows you to use your Crafting skill in order to improve
your battle abilities. This will allow you to focus more on it without
lowering your combat abilities. Another advantage is that it works with both
melee and ranged weapons, so you could wield a sword in your hand, a gun
in the other, and use the same skill for both. Note that this ability will
only work on enchanted crafted items. It will not work with any other items.
Also, it doesn't affect unarmed fighting, even if you wear enchanted crafted
gloves.

2. Brandcasting(Active, level 1)

Effect: Use a crafted weapon's(or gloves) brand as an offensive spell.
Damages: Weapon's/glove's brand.
Radius: Brand's radius(if any) + 2
Extra points: +20% to damages.
              +1 to radius for every 20 points.

This ability allows you to cast a ball spell based on the brand of one of
your equipped crafted weapons. With a couple of points and a good spellcraft
skill, this can be a useful attack spell, especially if you have a good
Alchemy skill which will allow to have even more powerful brands on your
weapons.

3. Essence Transfer(Active, level 1)

Effect: Transfer an item's brand on an enchanted crafted item, a potion, or
        a crystal.
Maximum weapon brand damages: 1000
Maximum potion base power: 10
Maximum crystal base power: 10
Extra points: +1000 to maximum weapon brand damages.
              +10 to maximum potion base power.
              +10 to maximum crystal base power.

With this ability, you can select a weapon, glove or potion, and transfer
it's brand onto another weapon, glove or potion. This can be useful if you
find a strong branded item or artifact, and would rather use it's brand
on your own crafted items instead(like if you want to use it with
Brandcasting, for example). It also has another use: you can use this
ability to change the essence of a potion. So if you find a cold-branded
weapon, you could transfer it's brand on a potion and it would become
a potion that deals cold damages. This can be combined with a good Alchemy
skill to create more resistances to more elements. Finally, if you use
rods, you can use this ability to customize your crystals as well.

4. Defense Transfer(Active, level 1)

Effect: Transfer an item's base AC to an enchanted crafted item.
Maximum original item's depth for transfer: 4
Amount transferred to body armors: Original item's base AC.
Amount tranferred to non body armor items: 25% of original item.
Extra points: +4 to maximum item's depth.

This ability allows you to take the base AC of an existing item, and
transfer a portion of it to another item. This allows you to do interesting
things, such as transfer a full plate's AC on a robe(to have a lower mana
penality), but perhaps the most interesting feature is that you can transfer
the AC to any items you want, so you can add this to rings, amulets and
even weapons(which will then benefit from a chance to block), as long as
they are enchanted crafted items.

5. Enchanter's Mana(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Gain mana from all worn enchanted crafted items.
Mana gain: Sum of your worn items "main stats".
Extra points: +20% multiplier to mana gain.

This passive ability gives you a bonus to mana based on the "main stats" of
your worn items. The main stat refers to the maximum base damages for weapons,
and the base AC for armors and armor pieces. So let's say you wear three
crafted items: a sword with damages 4d7, an armor with AC 30 and a pair
of boots with an AC of 6. The basic mana gain would be 28+30+6 = 64, and is
then affected by this ability's level. It's important to note that this
ability is applied BEFORE mana-enhancing abilities of items, so if you
craft items that raises your mana, it can become extremely high.

6. Intelligent Fighting(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Use intelligence as your damages stat when using an enchanted
        crafted weapon.
Max intelligence used: 5
Extra points: +5 to maximum intelligence used.

This passive ability allows you to use intelligence for calculating damages
instead of strength or dexterity if you use a ranged weapon. This is
similar to the Ranger's Weapon Finesse ability, although it only works
with enchanted crafted weapons you make. This allows you to focus more
on intelligence, thus improving your spells AND your fighting abilities.
This ability also works with crafted gloves if you're fighting with
martial arts. This ability will only provide to_d bonus if you wield
only enchanted crafted items in your hands. If you wield a crafted
sword, but a non-crafted shield, you won't get the bonus. If your strength
or dexterity would result in higher damages, these stats will be used
instead of intelligence. If you have both this and Weapon Finesse for
some reasons, this ability will take priority.

7. Etch Runes(Active, level 6)

Effect: Etch magical runes on an enchanted crafted item, allowing you to add
        one or more activable spells on it.
Maximum spell mana cost: 30
Number of spells: 1
Extra points: +30 to maximum spell's mana cost.
              +1 spell for every 10 points.

This ability allows you to add one or more spells as an activated effect for
your enchanted crafted items. You will get to pick a spell from your own
spells list, and add it as an effect. Note that not all spells can be added
to an item. The ones that can are the direct offensive spells, summons,
healing and hasting spells. The recharge times for the activations will be
equal to 25% of the spell's mana cost. If you select a multi effect spell, only
the first effect will be applied. Note that once placed in your item, the
spell's damages increase isn't affected by your casting skills such as
Elemental or Conjuration(although for Alteration effects, it is still used
to determine whether or not the monster will resist). Therefore, Spellcraft
is a better choice if you plan on focusing on this ability, as well as
the Mage's Improved Activation ability.(although the specialized spell
skills allows you to create spells for a lesser cost, and could help
reduce the recharge time).

8. Essence Fusion(Active, level 6)

Effect: Fuse an enchanted crafted weapon with a potion to change the base
	damages type.
Maximum weapon's depth: 5
Fusion strength: 20
Extra points: +5 to maximum weapon's depth.
              +20 to fusion strength.

With this ability, you can fuse a weapon, ammos or gloves with a potion
in order to change the base damages type the weapon deals. The success
is not guaranteed however. Whenever attempting a fusion, it will be a
test between this ability's strength versus the item's depth * 5. If
you win, the fusion will be successful and the type of damages will
change. If not, you lose your potion and nothing happens. The base
power of the potion you use must be at least 20% of the item's depth.
You won't be able to use this ability on powerful items with a weak
potion.

9. Batch Brew(Active, level 6)

Effect: Create multiple potions from two components.
Extra Potions: 1
Extra points: +1 extra potion every two points.

Normally, by mixing two components, you'd obtain a single potion. But by
using this ability, you can get more than one potion from the combination.
This can be very useful if you like making potions and using them as
throwing weapons or to brand your weapons. Note, however, that potions
created from this ability cannot be decomposed, nor can they be used as
components for other combinations.

10. Improved Enchanting(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Get extra item ability points for item bonus when crafting an item.
Extra points: 1
Extra points: +1 extra point for every 3 points.

This passive ability raises the amount of "tweak" points you get to spend
on item abilities when you craft them. By raising this ability, you can
create much more powerful items. With a lot of points, you'll be able to
create items with enormous bonus, and become very powerful.

DIVINER
---------

1. Divine Items(Active, level 1)

Effect: Fully identify any items, but also discover hidden properties.
Extra points: - Improved hidden properties.
              - With 5 or more points, you might be able to discover the
              "Eternal" property on unidentified items.
              - With 10 or more points, you might be able to discover the
              "Leveling" property on unidentified items.

When using this ability to identify an item, you will not only fully
identify it, but you will also discover hidden properties, meaning
that the item might be much stronger than if you just identified it
normally. As you place more points in this ability, the chances of
revealing more hidden properties will rise. This ability can only
be used on unidentified items, and will not improve artifacts,
although you can still use this ability to fully identify them.
Note that this ability bases itself on a "power" to determine the
extra bonus of an item(power which is between about 1.5 to 3 times
this ability's power), and that power can never exceed half of your
Divination skill. So if your Divination skill is low, you won't be
able to use this ability to it's full potential.

2. Divine Chaos(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Predict and counter chaos attacks and chaotic twists of reality.
Power: 100
Extra points: +100 to power per points.

This passive ability allows you to counter chaos-based attacks. Whenever
a chaos-based attack is used against you, you are allowed a saving throw
test based on this ability's power and the monster's level + mind stat
(even if it's a melee or ranged attack, for after all, it takes a sharp
mind to defeat a Diviner's predictions). If you succeed, you take no
damages from the attack. In addition to this, certain rare enemies will
use very special attacks that distorts and alter reality. This ability
will give you a chance to resist those abilities. Note that though the
power of this ability is very high, it's also a very specialized
ability. Chaos-based enemies are not very common.

3. Divine Dungeon(Passive, level 1)

Effect: When entering a new dungeon level, there is a chance it will be
        fully revealed, as if a "Reveal" spell had been cast on each
	dungeon cells.
Power: 50% of your Divination skill.
Extra points: +50% of Divination skill to power.

This passive ability grants you a chance to have dungeon levels fully
revealed when you enter them. The chance is based on a test of this
ability's level versus the dungeon's level you're currently on. The
deeper you go, the more difficult it is to get a fully revealed level.
Note that this ability will be much more effective if you have a high
Divination skill. The dungeon's difficulty is equal to five times the
dungeon's level. If your Divination skill is very high, you might not
need to place a lot of points in this ability for it to be effective.

4. Diviner's Dodge(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Predict and dodge melee and ranged attacks based on your
        Divination skill.
Power: 20% of your Divination skill.
Extra points: +20% of Divination skill to power.

This passive ability allows you to dodge melee and ranged attacks based
on your Divination skill. Whenever you are about to take damages from a
melee or ranged attack, a test of this ability's power versus the monster's
level and mind stat is made. If you win, you dodge the attack. If your
Divination skill is high, this can make you difficult to hit.

5. Diviner's Accuracy(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Gives you a chance to hit your opponent based on Divination skill.
Power: 20% of your Divination skill.
Extra points: +20% of Divination skill to power.

Whenever you try to hit an enemy using a melee or ranged attack, a test
between this ability's power and the monster's level and mind will be
rolled. If you win, you will hit the enemy. If your Divination skill
is high, this can be a very good way to gain extra accuracy if you
lack dexterity and to_hit bonus.

6. Nightmares(Active, level 1)

Effect: Causes fear to enemies based on your Divination skill.
Power: 25% of your Divination skill.
Radius: 3
Duration: 5
Extra points: +25% of Divination skill to power.
              +1 to radius for every 10 points.
              +1 to duration.

This ability allows you to cause fear to your enemies based on your
Divination skill. Whenever you use this ability, enemies will attempt
to resist, based on their level and mind stat. If they fail, they
will be struck with fear. The higher your Divination skill, the higher
the chances this ability will work. Note that Unique and fear-resistant
enemies are unaffected. Elites and Bosses can be affected, but will
resist it more easily.

7. School Focus: Divination(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Reduce the creation cost of divination spells.
Cost reduction: 1%
Additonal cost reduction: 3
Extra points: +1% cost reduction(up to a maximum of 75%).
		+3 additional cost reduction.

This passive ability will make the creation cost of Divination spells
cheaper, allowing you to create more powerful spells for a lesser amount
of mana. The Divination school of spells offer spells that can detect
monsters, objects and reveal dungeon features, but also a unique
offensive spell, and spells that can alter what you will encounter
and what items you find during your trips in dungeons.

8. Improved Fate Twisting(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improves the success rate of the "Twist Fate" Divination spells.
Power Bonus: 20% of Divination skill.
Extra points: +20% of Divination skill to power.
              For every points in this ability, dungeon levels with depth
              equal or lower that this ability's level will always be
              twisted by your spells.

This passive ability will add additional power to the "Twist Fate"
Divination spells. Because they allow you to have some control over
what you're gonna encounter, they can be very interesting spells
to use. However, their success is not guaranteed. This ability helps
make sure it works as you expect.

9. Improved Divination(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improves the success rate of the "Divination" spells.
Power Bonus: 20% of Divination skill.
Extra points: +20% of Divination skill to power.

This passive ability will give you a better success rate when casting
spells based on the "Divination" effect. Monsters can resist this effect
with their level and mind stats, so if you want to make it your main
method of attacking, you must ensure that it will work most of the time.
This ability will add additional power to the ability.

10. Wish(Active, level 10)

Effect: Wish for an item which will be carried by the boss of a random
	dungeon.
Extra points: Increased chance that the wish won't be twisted.

Using this powerful ability, you can wish for any items you want, and it
will be dropped by the boss of the next random dungeon you visit.
However, using this ability is dangerous, as there is a chance the wish
will be twisted and that means not only will you not get the item you
wished for, but you will have to face a an extremely nasty enemy at the
end of the dungeon. Whether the wish is twisted or not depends on several
factors:

- The depth of the item you wished for. The rarer the item, the more
difficult it is to wish for it.
- The depth of the random dungeon. A deeper random dungeon raises the
chance of having a successful wish.
- This ability's level and your Divination skill.

In other words, if you wish for a very powerful item, but only placed
one point in this ability and used a dungeon twisting spell to generate
a level 1 random dungeon with one floor, you can be almost certain that
the wish will be twisted. On the other hand, wishing for a weak item
while having a deep dungeon and high ability level guarantees that it
won't be twisted. It's up to you to determine what reward you're seeking
and how much risks you're willing to take.

Once you use this ability, the wish will take effect the next time a
random dungeon is generated. If there is already one, you need to leave
the outdoor cell, and re-enter.

Special Wish: If you wish for "Twisted Boss", you will ensure that the
wish will be twisted. However, that boss will actually be worth some
experience and may drop items. It will be very hard to defeat, of course,
and will not give more experience or better items than the normal boss
would.

KENSAI
---------------

1. Focus (Passive, level 1)
Get passive bonuses to combat based on your wisdom. Note that unlike most
 abilities, these bonuses are based on your current wisdom, not your base
 wisdom, so wisdom boosting abilities and spells and equipment work well
 with this ability.
Bonus to_d: current wis
Additional AP: +1 multiplier to to_d bonus
Bonus dex: 5% of wis
Additional AP: +1 multiplier to dex bonus per 2 AP spent
Bonus speed: 5% of wis
Additional AP: +1 multiplier to speed bonus per 2 AP spent

2. Iajutsu (Passive, Level 1)
When attacked by a monster's melee attack, you get a strike against that
 enemy before they attack. Having a high wisdom makes this ability quite
 powerful. You must be wielding a one handed sword, and not have heavy
 armor, a shield, or a ranged weapon equiped to use this ability.
Damage: weapon damage.
Bonus from wis: +3% to base damage per wis, +3% to_h bonus per wis
Extra AP: increase total damage (base + wis bonus) by 10%

3. Honorable Warrior (Passive, level 1)
To most Kensai, the concept of personal honor is paramount. To dishonor
 yourself is a fate much worse than death. Some, however, have ignored
 the importance of honor and become dark kensai, using dark prayers to
 boost their wisdom rather than their honor. This ability gives a boost
 to your wisdom based on your current alignment.
Wisdom boost: +5% bonus per alignment level above 0
Additional AP: additional 5% bonus per alignment level above 0

4. Finish Him! (Active, level 1)
Lets you perform an attack that does great damage based on your wisdom
 (this is in addition to bonuses from the Focus ability). Note that
 this powerful attack is not a combat feat, it is meant as (obviously)
 a finishing move. You must be wielding a one handed sword, and not
 have heavy armor, a shield, or a ranged weapon equiped to use this ability.
Damage bonus: +20% to your weapon damage per wis
Extra Points: Additional 5% damage increase per wis 

5. Lightning Strike (Active, level 1, combat feat)
Lets you attack opponents an extra space away, without actually moving.
 This simulates the amazing abilities of the Kensai to strike at
 opponents so fast that they don't even see him move. Using combat
 feats, you can kill surrounding opponents that are closing in leaving
 the opponent that is right next to you standing alone. You must be
 wielding a one handed sword, and not have heavy armor, a shield, or
 a ranged weapon equiped to use this ability.
Damage: weapon damage
Bonus from wis: +2% to damage per wis
Range: 2
Extra AP: +10% to total damage (base + wis bonus), for every 10 AP add an additional range.

6. Arrow Cutting (Passive, level 1)
Lets you block ranged attacks by monsters (not magical attacks).
 A resistance roll of this ability's power vs the monster's level +
 ranged skill is made, if you succeed the attack is deflected and you
 take no damage, if the monster succeeds, then the attack applies
 normally (though it can then be parried) You must be wielding a one
 handed sword, and not have heavy armor, a shield, or a ranged weapon
 equiped to use this ability.
Power 25
Bonus from wis: +2 Power per wis
Additional AP: +25 power

7. The Lion's Roar (Active, level 6)
Gives a Warcry that scares away enemies, and gives you bravery to
 continue the fight.
Warcry Power: 15 per AP
Bonus to Warcry from wis: +2 Power per wis
Heroism Power: 5 per AP
Heroism Duration: 4 + 1 per AP

8. The Scorpion's Tail (Active, Level 6, combat feat)
Some Kensai see the feint as a cowardly, dishonorable attack because
 of its deceptive nature, but the technique has gained support by
 many other Kensai masters, who teach it as a way to defeat enemies
 who are problematic, and difficult to hit. This ability reduces
 the enemy's defense slightly, and also causes a resistance roll of
 this ability's power vs the monster's level + mind. If the monster
 fails, defense and to hit are reduced more, and the bewilderment
 of such an move also causes the enemy to fail spellcasting half
 the time. The initial reduction of the monster's defense can be
 applied multiple times, but the affect of the resistance roll can
 only affect each monster once (GF_TAUNT) You must be wielding a
 one handed sword, and not have heavy armor, a shield, or a ranged
 weapon equiped to use this ability.
Damage: none
Defense reduction: 10% of Monster's defense
Power: 20
Bonus from wis: +2 Power per wis
Additional defense reduction and hit reduction on failed resist: 33%
Monster Spell Failure on a failed resist: 50%
Additional AP: +20 Power per AP, +5% initial defense reduction for each 10 AP spent

9. The Dragon's Fury (Passive, level 6) 
You do additional magical damage (mana type) with any melee attack.
 Your ability to conentrate your inner energy (ki) extends to your
 sword, as it is a representation of your family's honor. Many
 Masters of Kensai believe this technique is based on the same
 energy that a dragon draws from within in order to breath out
 or claw with magic attacks. The damage done is treated like brand
 damage and so is not returned. You must be wielding a one handed
 sword, and not have heavy armor, a shield, or a ranged weapon
 equiped to use this ability.
Fury brand damage: 20% of weapon damage
Bonus from wis: +2% to the base Fury damage per wis
Extra AP: +10% to total (base + wis bonus) Fury damage

10. Whirlwind (Active, Level 10) 
The Kensai can move and perform a spin attack after each movement,
 decimating many enemies at once. You must be wielding a one handed
 sword, and not have heavy armor, a shield, or a ranged weapon
 equiped to use this ability.
Movement: 3 
Base damage: 50% of weapon damage
Bonus from wis: +2% to base damage per wis
Extra AP: +10% to total damage (base + wis bonus) damage, for every 4 AP,
add an additional space moved.

MONSTERS
----------

1. Greater Evolution(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your strength, dexterity, intelligence and wisdom by
        (chosen monster's depth)%.
Extra points: +(chosen monster's depth)% to stats.

This passive ability increases your main offensive base stats by an amount
based on the depth level of the monster you're playing. The more powerful
your monster is, the higher the bonus will be. If you want to aim for high
base stats, consider placing points in this ability, especially if your
monster kind has powerful evolutions.

2. Small but Deadly(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your strength, dexterity, intelligence and wisdom by
        1% + 1% for every experience levels above your monster's depth.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to bonus.

This passive ability increases your main offensive base stats by an amount
based on how much higher your level is compared to your monster's depth.
The opposite of Greater Evolution, this ability is meant for players who
plays with weaker monster kinds, or prefer to stick to a lower monster
for personnal preference or because that particular monster has a particular
attack that is part of the player's strategy. With this, even a lower
monster can still get high stats later on.

3. Improved Magics(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase damages and success rate of your spells.
Bonus: +50% to offensive and healing spells damages/power.
       +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
       +10% to stats boosters power.
       +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.
Extra points: +50% to spells damages.
              +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
              +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.

This passive ability increases the damages of all your monster's spells.
While you can invest your ability points in a specific spell for twice
the effect, if the monster you're playing has several diverse spells,
then this ability might be a worthy option because it will improve all
of them as opposed to just one. Also, if your spell needs to win a
resistance roll to work(such as status ailment spells), it will improve
the success rate of these spells.

4. Inner Elemental Mastery(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase damages of a chosen element by 10% of your resistance to it.
        Can also be activated for a "Piercing Spells" effect.
Damages bonus: +(10% of resistance)% to specific element damages.
Piercing power for activated effect: 15
Extra points: +(10% of resistance)% to specific element damages.
              +15 to piercing power.

When you increase this ability for the first time, you will be asked to
choose between 12 of the 16 main elements, and you might also get some other
choices if your monster has a specific resistance to something else. Once you
choose the element, this ability will increase the damages of any attacks
of the chosen element by 10% of your resistance to it. This ability is
obsiously meant for monsters with natural immunities, of which many have,
but you can still benefit from it even if you don't have one by equipping
essences or items that gives you resistances.

5. Improved Essence Activations(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase damages and success rate of activated essences.
Bonus: +50% to offensive and healing spells damages/power.
       +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
       +10% to stats boosters power.
       +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.
Extra points: +50% to spells damages.
              +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
              +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.

This passive ability increases the damages and success rate of the activation
of Essences. This is basically just like Improved Magics, but for activations.
If your monster cannot inherently cast spells, equipped essences with spells
and raising this ability is a way of getting the magical attacks you normally
wouldn't have access to. Keep in mind that most of them will require the
essence to recharge, so it's a good idea to equip more than one essence with
spells if you plan on using this ability.

6. Improved Defense(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your base AC based on your monster's base AC.
Bonus: 25% of chosen monster's base AC.
Extra points: +25% of chosen monster's base AC to base AC.

This passive ability increases your base AC based on how much the monster you
chose has as innate base AC. Depending on the chosen monster, this ability
can provide a significant bonus, which is further improved greatly by
Agility. However, note that lower depth monsters have very low base AC and
if you play as one, you might not get much out of this ability, which is
meant to be used by monsters with high AC.

7. Improved Counters(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improve your chance of blocking with blocking counters, and improves
        damages of returning counters.
Base blocking chance bonus: +5
Extra points: +5 to base blocking chance.
              +1 multiplier to returned damages for returning counters.

This passive ability makes your chosen monster's special counters more
effective. Many monsters have the ability to block or even reflect an
incoming attack, and if you have such an ability, this will improve it. Note
that in some cases, there may not be a blocking test and it's just a static
percentile chance to block the attack. In this case, this ability has
no effects on it.

8. Improved Passive Powers(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improve special passive abilities your monster may have.
Extra points: Improves powers further.

Some monsters have special passive powers unique to them. If they do,
this ability will make them more powerful in various ways(increased damages,
success rate, healing, etc...), based on the nature of the power.

Note that by default, these powers are off. Use the 'K' command to toggle
them On and Off.

9. Racial Champion(Active/Passive, level 6)

Effect: Increase your charisma. Can also be activated to rally monsters of
        the same kind to your cause.
Charisma bonus: +(monster's depth)%.
Activated Effect's Power: 40
Radius: 3
Can be resisted: Yes(mind).
Extra points: +(monster's depth)% to charisma.
              +40 to activated effect's power.
              +1 to radius every 20 points.

This ability has two effects. The first one is a passive bonus to your
Charisma, which can be very useful if you have summoning spells. The
second one is a charm-type effect that affects monsters of the same
kind as yours(has the same letter). The power is high, though it will
not work on elites, bosses and uniques. Monsters of a different kind
will be unaffected.

Note that this ability doesn't take into account "greater" evolutions.
For example, a lesser dragon('d') cannot persuade an ancient dragon('D').

10. Paragon Elder Monster(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Become an upper class and respected monster. Improves all your
        abilities and may give you a special rank.
Bonus to all stats: 5%.
Extra points: +5% to all stats.
              At level 10 and higher, you become an Elite monster, and
              may pick a special ability. At level 20, you become a Boss
              monster, and you may pick a second ability. You may then
              pick one every 10 points, until you learn them all.

This passive ability will improve all your stats based on your base
stats. However, it's true power is to give you access to some of the
elite and boss monsters powers. Your color will also change to the elite
or boss color! Here are the abilities you can choose:

Halve Damages:
Damages you take are reduced by 50%. This apply to all forms of damages,
both physical and magical. This can be especially powerful if you play
as a monster that has a high hp and defense.

Double Weapon Damages:
Melee and ranged attacks will do double damages. If you use a lot of these,
this ability will make them much more powerful. This works with not just
your special attacks, but any normal attacks and with any weapons or
unarmed attacks.

Double Magic Damages:
Your monster's special magic attacks will do double damages. If you use spells
a lot, this will make them stronger. This will also double any magical attacks
from essences activation. However, it does not improve regular spells or other
magic attacks.

Crushing Blows:
Your melee attacks have a chance to cause paralysis, confusion and a 25%
hit rate reduction. The monsters will attempt a strength-based resistance
roll to avoid the effect. The power of this ability depends on how you use
it:
- Normal weapon/unarmed attack or special in a combat feat: power of 5/points.
- Special melee attack outside of combat feat: power of 20/points + strength.
- Special melee attack outside of combat feat,
  and with Power Attack: power of (20/points + strength) * (Power Attack mod)

The power is low with normal attacks, but keep in mind that with martial arts,
you will get a lot of blows. The paralysis and confusion will not work if the
enemy is resistant to those effects, but otherwise will last for 5 turns.
The hit rate reduction is permanent and will work on any enemies.

Return 50% Melee damages:
Enemies that attacks you in melee combat will have 50% of damages
returned to them. Even if they miss you, they still take damages.
Note that they are still typed damages, so the monster could be
immune. The returned damages receives a multiplier for every points
in this ability.

Return 50% Magic damages:
Enemies that cast an offensive spell at you will be returned 50% of
the spell's damages. Even if you avoid the spell, the spell will
still be returned, although like the melee returning ability, they
are typed damages. The returned damages receives a multiplier for
every points in this ability.


MONSTER INNATE ATTACKS AND SPELLS:

As a monster, you can also choose to place points in any of your innate
melee attacks, ranged attacks or spells. That has the following benefits:

Melee:

Most monsters have melee innate melee attacks. As a monster player, you
can use any of these moves as special attacks and even as combat feats.
Special melee attacks works with both martial arts and weapons, meaning
that both humanoid and non-humanoid monsters can fully benefit from
them. Special melee attacks will add their innate damage rolls to the
base damages of your melee attacks.

You can choose to places ability points in these attacks, and it will
have the following benefits:

- If used as a combat feat, the attacks gain 10% extra damages per points.
If used outside of a combat feat combo, it will be 20% extra damages
per points. This apply to the final damages, not just the innate damages
bonus, so this can become very powerful for any monsters!
- The attack gains a radius of 1 every 10 points.
- +20% bonus to hit rate per points.

Note: These special attacks are treated as melee attacks for the purpose
of counters and hit rate tests. However, non-physical special attacks will
hurt elites/bosses immune to physical attacks. Of course, elemental special
attacks will not hurt magic immunes. Also, the special attacks damages
are never returned through standard returning abilities.

Ranged:

Innate ranged attacks are often used by humanoid monsters. As a result,
they can be combined with ranged weapons for maximum effectiveness.
If used without a ranged weapon, it will be treated as a magic attack,
but will use the innate attack damages and will use dex-based ranged
damages calculation. Like melee attacks, the attack's innate damages
roll will be added to the normal base ammo damages.

Note that using a special ranged attack with a ranged weapon still
consumes ammos like a normal ranged attack would. Also, the attack's
elemental type will be the one used by your attack, regardless of
shooter or ammo.

Innate ranged attacks without weapons are treated as magical attacks,
and therefore do not have hit rate test. However, you'll need
intelligence and wisdom to bypass magic counters of enemies, not
dexterity.

Placing points in these attacks have the following benefits:

Ranged weapons:
- +20% additional damages per points.
- +1 radius every 10 points.
- +20% bonus to hit rate per points.
- Every 3 points, you can use the attack with another of your extra
shots, if any. So if you have two extra shots in one hand, you
need 3 points in the ability to use it twice in a row. Note that
each ranged weapons is treated separately, so if you wield two
ranged weapons, and have 2 shots in each hands, 3 points in this
ability will allow you to use the ability twice in a row for each
weapons, so a total of 4 times.

Without ranged weapons:
- +1 multiplier to damages per points.
- +1 radius every 10 points.

Magic:

Monsters innate spells are casted using either intelligence or wisdom,
whichever is the highest, though they consume mana, so intelligence
is generally the better choice. Placing points in a specific spell
has twice the benefits of the general Improved Magics ability, with
some extras. Here's the benefits:

+1 multiplier to offensive and healing spells damages/power.
+20 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
+20% to stats boosters power.
+2 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.
+1 extra summon for every 5 points with summoning spells.
+1 to duration of stats boosters and hasting spells.

If the monster has any unique special powers, placing points in them
will improve them in various ways, depending on the nature of that power.

Note: The Improved Magics ability and specific powers are additive in
terms of bonus. Placing one points in a specific power and one point
in Improved Magics results in a bonus of 150% to damages.


Final note: You may notice that the names of the attacks might not
always match the type of weapons you are using them with. However,
the name of the attacks do not affect the usability of the attacks
in any way, so just because the attack is named "Sword" or "Arrow"
doesn't mean you can't use it with a mace or a gun.
