=== Attacking and Being Attacked ===
 
Attacking is simple in Angband.  If you move into a creature, you attack him.
You can attack from a distance by firing a missile or by magical means (such
as aiming a wand).  Creatures attack in the same way.  If they move into you,
they attack you.  Some creatures can also cast spells from a distance, and
others can use various breath weapons (such as fire) on you from a distance.

Creatures in walls can not be attacked by wands or other magic attacks
normally stopped by walls, nor can they be shot at with bows and arrows.
Tunnelling into the wall (using the "tunnel" or "alter" command) will allow 
you to attack any creature in the wall. This applies to creatures which 
"pass through" walls: if they "bore through" walls, the wall is no longer
there, and the creature can be targetted normally.

If you are wielding a weapon, the damage for the weapon is used when you hit
a creature.  Otherwise you get a single punch which does minimal damage.

You may wield both a primary weapon for melee combat, and a bow or other
missile launcher for launching missiles at the same time (along with a
light, an amulet, two rings, a helmet, boots, gloves, a shield, a cloak, and
body armor).  Be sure not to try and kill a dragon with a shovel, it makes
you look silly and probably won't work. (Note that "probably" is used 
advisedly: it has actually been done...)
 
Firing a missile (while wielding the appropriate launcher) is the only way to
get the "full" power out of the missile.  You may of course throw an arrow at
a monster without shooting it, but you will find the effects may not be what
you had hoped.

Hits and misses are determined by ability to hit versus armor class.  A hit
is a strike that does some damage; a miss may in fact reach a target, but
fails to do any damage.  Higher armor classes make it harder to do damage,
and so lead to more misses; they also reduce the damage from a strike that
actually occurs.
 

=== Monster Memories ===

There are hundreds of different creatures in the pits of Angband, many of
which have the same letter symbol and color on the screen.  The exact species
of a creature can be discovered by looking at it.  It is also very difficult
to keep track of the capabilities of various creatures.  Luckily, Angband
automatically keeps track of your experiences with a particular creature.
This feature is called the monster memory.  You monster memory recalls the
particular attacks of each creature (whether or not technically a monster)
which you have suffered, as well as recalling if you have observed them to
multiply or move erratically, or drop treasure, etc.  Otherwise you would
simply have to take notes, which is an unnecessary bother.

If you have killed enough of a particular creature, or suffered enough
attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you with information
not otherwise available, such as a armor class or hit dice.  These are not
explained, but may be useful to give the relative danger of each creature.
This memory can be passed on to a new character even after you die by means
of a reduced save file.
 

=== Your Weapon ===

Carrying a weapon in your backpack does you no good.  You must wield a weapon 
before it can be used in a fight.  A secondary weapon can be kept by keeping
it in the backpack, and switching it with the primary weapon when needed.

Weapons have two main magical characteristics, their enchanted ability to hit
and their enchanted ability to do damage, expressed as `(+#,+#)'.  A normal
weapon would be `(+0,+0)'.  Many weapons in Angband have bonuses to hit
and/or do damage.  Some weapons are cursed, and have penalties that hurt the
player.  Cursed weapons cannot be unwielded until the curse is lifted.
Identifying a weapon will inform you of the magical bonuses and penalties
and whether or not it is cursed.

Angband assumes that your youth in the rough environment near the dungeons
has taught you the relative merits of different weapons, and displays as
part of their description the damage dice which define their capabilities.
Any damage enchantment is added to the dice roll for that weapon.  The dice
used for a given  weapon is displayed as "#d#".  The first number indicates
how many dice to roll, and the second indicates how many sides they have.  A
"2d6" weapon will give damage from 2 to 12, plus any damage bonus.  The
weight of a weapon is also a consideration.  Heavy weapons may hit harder,
but they are also harder to use.  Depending on your strength, dexterity,
character class, and weapon weight, you may get several attacks per turn.

Missile booster weapons, such as bows, have their characteristics added to
those of the missile used, if the proper weapon/missile combination is used,
and the the launcher multiplier is applied to the total damage, making
missile weapons very powerful given the proper missiles, especially if they
are enchanted.

Although you receive any magical bonuses an unidentified weapon may possess
when you wield it, those bonuses will not be added in to the displayed
values of to-hit and to-dam on your character sheet.  You must identify the
weapon before the displayed values reflect the real values used.

Finally, some rare weapons have special abilities.  These are called ego
weapons, and are feared by great and meek.  An ego weapon must be wielded
to receive the benefit of its abilities. It should be noted that some of 
these items are considerably more powerful than others, and generally the 
most powerful items are the rarest. Also important is the fact that not all
ego-items are nice... some have good and bad points, others are totally 
worthless and dangerous to the player's health.

Ego weapons are denoted by the following "names":  

(Defender)
     A magical weapon that actually helps the wielder defend himself, thus
     increasing his/her armour class, and protecting him/her against damage
     from fire, cold, acid, lightning, and falls.  This weapon also will
     increase your stealth, let you see invisible creatures, protect you
     from paralyzation and some slowing attacks, and help you regenerate hit
     points and mana faster.  As a result of the regeneration ability, you
     will use up food somewhat faster than normal while wielding such a
     weapon.  These powerful weapons also will sustain one stat, though this
     stat will vary from weapon to weapon.

(Holy Avenger)
     A Holy Avenger is one of the more powerful of weapons.  A Holy Avenger
     will increase your wisdom and your armour class.  This weapon will do
     extra damage when used against evil, demonic and undead creatures, and
     will also give you the ability to see invisible creatures.  These
     weapons are basically extremely powerful versions of Blessed Blades
     and can be wielded by priests with no penalty. These weapons, like 
     (Defender) weapons, also will sustain one random stat.

(Blessed)
     A blessed blade will increase your wisdom.  If you are a priest,
     wielding a non-blessed sword or polearm causes a small penalty while
     attacking and may infuriate your god, decreasing the chances that he
     will accept your prayers: a blessed blade may be wielded without 
     this penalty.  Blessed blades also have one extra, random, power.

Weapon of Westernesse.
     A Weapon of Westernesse is one of the more powerful weapons.  It slays
     orcs, trolls, and giants, while increasing your strength, dexterity, 
     and constitution.  It also lets you see invisible creatures and protects 
     from paralyzation and some slowing attacks.  These blades were made by 
     the Dunedain.

Weapon of Gondolin.
     A weapon of this kind, from the last kingdom of the High Elves to 
     fall under Morgoth's yoke, provides power against all his living 
     servants - orcs, trolls, demons and dragons. It also gives off light
     when there are enemies around (which, in Angband, is all the time), 
     and provides resistance to darkness, the ability to see invisible
     monsters, and one extra random power. These weapons are powerful
     but rare.

Weapon of Extra Attacks.
     A weapon of extra attacks will allow the wielder to deliver extra
     attacks during each round.

Weapon of Fury.
     This weapon is a gift for all those whose sole wish is to smash their
     enemies to an unreconizable pulp. It provides bonuses to-hit, to-dam
     and to extra attacks. However, the wielder will be driven into such a 
     berserk fury that his shouts and yells will awaken and aggravate every
     monster within earshot.

Elemental Branded Weapons.
     Each of the four elemental attacks has a corresponding weapon which 
     will do treble its base damage to creatures not resistant to that 
     element. (It should be noted that the magical damage bonus is not
     affected by this: a weapon of Flame (2d6) (+5,+6) does 6d6+6 damage 
     per hit, not 6d6+18, against creatures which are not fire-resistant.)
     There are weapons of Flame, Frost, Lightning and Acid elemental brands.

Weapons of Slaying enemies.
     These weapons do extra damage against creatures of a vulnerable type.
     Weapons of Slay Evil and Slay Animal do double the base damage, while
     weapons of Slay Orc, Troll, Giant, Dragon, Demon and Undead do triple
     the base damage. As with elemental branded weapons, the magical damage
     bonus is not affected.

Weapons of *Slaying* enemies.
     These weapons, in addition to doing extra damage to your enemies, have
     extra powers as well. Weapons of *Slay Animal* will give a bonus to
     intelligence (which is what sets the sentient races apart from the 
     animals), and provide slow digestion so that the player does not need
     to eat so often. Weapons of *Slay Evil* provide a bonus to wisdom and
     are blessed, so that priests may use them even if they are sharp: and 
     they have a bonus power, as other Blessed weapons do. Weapons of *Slay
     *Undead* will allow you to see into the invisible world of ghosts and 
     wraiths, and provide a wisdom bonus: weapons of *Slay Demon* provide 
     resistance to fire, the chief weapon of many demons, and grant 
     intelligence: and weapons of *Slay Dragon* do five times their base
     damage, provide a constitution bonus, and resistance to fear. Weapons 
     of *Slay Orc* will increase and sustain the character's dexterity, 
     weapons of *Slay Giant* will grant the wielder the strength of a giant
     and sustain it, and weapons of *Slay Troll* will impart the strength of 
     a Troll and give the trollish ability of regeneration.

Weapon of Morgul.
     These blades are so foully cursed with evil, it is rumored that it is
     nearly impossible to remove them without a special curse-removing spell,
     much stronger than normal Remove Curse. However, they can be powerful 
     in the right hands - for they are weapons of the undead, and will thus 
     give a certain amount of power over all things undead. The character will
     see invisible, and be protected against the forces of the netherworld and
     attempts by other creatures to drain his life force: on the other hand, 
     the weapon itself will drain the character's life, and nearby monsters
     will know that this weapon is in the wrong hands and will come to recover
     it - no monster will remain asleep when the character wields a weapon of 
     Morgul.

Shovels of Digging.
     These powerful diggers will dig through granite as if it were mere wood, 
     and mineral veins as if they were butter. Permanent rock is still an 
     impassable obstacle.

Shovels of Earthquakes.
     These powerful but unpredictable items are magically enchanted to dig
     even faster than shovels of Digging: moreover, they possess a fair
     bonus to-hit and to-damage, and thus might actually be useful when used
     as a melee weapon. They increase the wielder's strength as well. 
     They do, however, have a downside: the weapon will periodically cause
     a mighty earthquake when it hits a monster.

Ego Missile Launchers and Ammo:
-------------------------------
Launchers of Accuracy.
    These launchers have an unnaturally high to-hit number, making them 
    extremely accurate.

Launchers of Velocity.
    These launchers do an unnaturally high amount of damage due to their 
    high to-hit number.

Launchers of Extra Shots.
    These launchers allow the wielder to shoot more times per round than 
    normal.

Launchers of Extra Might.
    These launchers have a higher base damage than normally made launchers 
    of their type. For instance, a Long Bow of Extra Might (x3)(+X,+Y)(+2)
    is really a Long Bow (x5)(+X,+Y) where (+X,+Y) is the standard to-hit 
    and to-dam. As the damage multiplier with the bow affects *everything*
    - the base arrow damage, the magical damage bonus on both the bow and
    the arrow, and any bonuses for slaying or elemental-branded arrows - 
    this makes it a powerful weapon.

Ammo of Wounding.
    This ammunition - whether it be pebbles, iron shots, arrows, bolts, 
    seeker arrows or seeker bolts - has big bonuses to-hit and to-damage.

Ammo of Elemental Brands, and Ammo of Slaying.
    This works in the same way as melee weapons of the same type: double
    damage for slay evil and slay animal, triple damage for all other 
    slays and for all elemental brands. Unlike melee weapons, the slays 
    and elemental brands *do* affect the magical damage bonus for ammo.

Slings of Buckland.
    These slings were made especially in the Shire by the most expert of 
    Hobbit slingers. They deliver their missiles - admittedly, the missiles
    in question are mere pebbles and iron shots - with extra force, and at 
    extra speed, and provide greater accuracy thanks to increased dexterity.

Bows of Lothlorien.
    These bows belong to the highly secretive elves of the Golden Wood, all
    of them excellent archers. They allow the wielder to shoot with much 
    greater power than normal (extra might), and increased accuracy (higher 
    dexterity), and cannot be destroyed on the ground by acid and fire.

Crossbows of the Haradrim.
    These mighty catapults are much faster to reload, and more powerfully 
    sprung, than normal crossbows. The end result of this is that the 
    character may shoot faster and with greater power than normal.

Ammo of Holy Might.
    This can only be heavy ammo - seeker arrows and bolts, and iron shots.
    It is very rare, but is blessed and does extra damage to demons, undead
    and evil creatures, and is branded with holy fire. It also cannot be 
    damaged on the ground or in the player's inventory by fire or acid.

Launcher of the Nazgul.
    This cursed bow belongs to the Wraith-lords, and will drain the life 
    experience from living beings that wield it. It does, however, allow 
    the player to see into the wraith-world of invisibility.

Ammo of Backbiting.
    This cursed ammunition will never hit what it is aimed at. Rumour has
    it that it will curve round and hit the person who shot it in the 
    back: but so far, this rumour has proved unfounded, and is believed
    to be false.

Apart from these there are some very rare and well made blades in the
dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These include Blades
of Chaos, Maces of Disruption, and Scythes of Slicing.  They can also be
ego weapons like the ones above.  For example, a Blade of Chaos (Holy
Avenger) is much more powerful than many artifact weapons!

=== Your Armor Class ===

Your armor class (or AC) is a number that describes the amount and the
quality of armor being worn. Armor class will generally run from about 0 to
150, though exceptionally good armor can improve even on the latter figure.
 
The larger your armor class, the more protective it is.  A negative armor
class would actually help get you hit.  Armor protects you in three manners.
One, it makes you harder to be hit for damage.  A hit for no damage is the
same as a miss.  Two, good armor will absorb some of the damage that your
character would have taken from normal attacks.  Three, acid damage is
reduced by wearing body armor (but the armor will be damaged instead).  It
is obvious that a high armor class is a must for surviving the deeper levels
of Angband.

Each piece of armour has a base armor value, which, like the damage from
weapons, is assumed known by the player, and a magic bonus, which will not
be displayed unless the armor has been identified or was bought in a store.

Armor class values are always displayed between a set of brackets as "[#]"
or "[#,+#]".  The first value is the armor class of the item.  The second
number is the magical bonus of the item which is only displayed if known,
and will always have a sign preceding the value.  Note that a few rings,
amulets, and weapons also have the "[+#]" notation, indicating that they
provide an armor bonus.  Many pieces of heavy body armor will also have a
"(-#)" before the "[#,+#]", which indicates that the weight of the armor
decreases your chances of hitting monsters.  This can range from nonexistent
for very light armor to (-8) for the very heaviest armor!

Some pieces of armor will possess special abilities denoted by the following
names:

Ego Armors and Shields:
-----------------------
of Resist Acid, Lightning, Fire or Cold.
     A character wearing armor or a shield with one such resistance will
     take only 1/3 of normal damage from attacks involving the relevant 
     element of acid, lightning, fire or cold. Note that multiple 
     permanent sources of resistance are NOT cumulative: wearing two is 
     no better than wearing one. However, armor which provides resistance
     to acid cannot itself be damaged by acid, and this is a good reason 
     to wear more than one such piece of armor.
 
of Resistance.
     A character wearing armor with this ability will have resistance to
     Acid, Cold, Fire, and Lightning as explained in each part above.

Dwarven Armor.
     This is invariably heavy metal armor, and cannot be damaged by either 
     acid or fire. It will impart to its wearer the strength and constitution
     of the Dwarven race, and the ability to see in the dark and never be 
     paralyzed.
 
Armor of Elvenkind.
     This is the same as Resistance armor, only generally better enchanted.
     It will make you more stealthy.  This armor also possesses an extra 
     resistance, at random from the following list: poison, light, dark, 
     blindness, confusion, nexus, fear, nether, chaos, disenchantment,
     sound and shards.
 
Robes of Permanence.
     These robes are designed especially for wizards.  Just like Elvenkind
     armor, they provide resistance to fire, cold, acid, and electricity and
     cannot be damaged by acid.  They sustain all of your stats and protect
     you from a good deal of all experience draining.  Also like Elvenkind
     armor, they have one random resistance.

Shields of Preservation.
     These rare shields will preserve the character's physical body, soul  
     and magical enchantments: in addition to a large bonus to armor class, 
     they sustain the character's strength, constitution and dexterity, and
     provide resistance to all disenchantment and most experience draining.
     It also provides one extra resistance.

Armor and Shields of Vulnerability.
     This severely cursed armor appears to be powerful, but in fact lets 
     through the full force of every attack directed at it.

Dragon Scale Mails.
     These extremely rare pieces of armour come in many different colors,
     each protecting you against the relevant dragons.  Naturally they are
     all resistant to acid damage.  They also occasionally allow you to
     breathe as a dragon would!

Ego Helms:
----------
Stat Boosting Helms.
     There are magical helms found in the dungeon that have the ability
     to boost the wearer's intelligence, wisdom, or charisma.  Helms of 
     Beauty are the ones that boost charisma.  In addition to boosting 
     the relevant stat these helms will also prevent that stat from being 
     drained.

Crown of the Magi.
     This is the great crown of the wizards.  The wearer will have an
     increased (and sustained) intelligence, and will also be given 
     resistance against fire, frost, acid, and lightning.  These valuable
     helms also have an additional random power.

Crown of Might.
     This is the crown of the warriors.  The wearer will have an
     increased and sustained strength, dexterity, and constitution, 
     and will also be immune to any foe's attempt to slow or paralyze 
     him or her.

Crown of Lordliness.
     This is the great crown of the priests.  The wearer will have an
     increased and sustained wisdom and charisma, and will never be 
     afraid.

Helm/Crown of Seeing.
     This is the great helmet or crown of the rogues.  The wearer will be 
     able to see invisible creatures, and will have an increased ability to 
     locate traps and secret doors.  It is also rumored that the wearer of 
     such a helm will not be able to be blinded, and will be able to see in 
     the dark by seeing heat.

Helm/Crown of Serenity.
     This item allows the wearer to remain clear-headed: he will not be 
     affected by confusion or sound, nor will he ever be terrified out of 
     his wits.

Helm of Light.
     In addition to providing a permanent light source for the wearer, this 
     helm also provides resistance against light-based attacks.

Helm/Crown of Telepathy.
     This helm or crown grants the wearer the power of telepathy.

Helm of Regeneration.
     This helm will help you regenerate hit points and mana more quickly
     than normal, allowing you to fight longer before needing to rest.  You
     will use food faster than normal while wearing this helm because of
     the regenerative effects.

Crown of Night and Day.
     This special crown gives its wearer power over all things to do with 
     light and darkness: attacks of these types will be resisted by the 
     player, and the player will always have enough light to see.

Helms of Teleportation.
     This cursed helm will always keep the player on the hop, never sure
     where he is and never able to stay in one place.

Crowns of Sickliness.
     Ruling is such a drain on one's health... This crown will debilitate
     its wearer, reducing his strength, dexterity and constitution.

Helms/Crowns of Dullness.
     You wonder why you didn't notice the huge "D" written on the front 
     of this thing before you put it on... this dunce's headwear reduces
     intelligence and wisdom, and also charisma because nobody likes an 
     idiot.
 
Ego Cloaks:
-----------
Cloak of Protection.
     This finely made cloak will come with an unnaturally high enchantment
     and is not affected by elemental based attacks. It is also made of an 
     exceptionally thick and durable material, which protects the wearer 
     from blasts of crystal shards.

Cloak of Stealth.
     This cloak will increase the wearer's stealth, making the wearer less
     likely to wake up sleeping monsters.

Cloak of the Magi.
     This cloak increases and sustains intelligence, and allows its wearer
     to remain hidden from monsters, all the better to surprise them by 
     casting a spell on them.

Cloak of Aman.
     These exceptionally rare cloaks provide great stealth, have a very 
     high enchantment, and one random resistance.

Cloak of Enveloping.
     This cloak gets in the way of everything you try to do. You can't seem 
     to hit monsters without having to shove aside several folds of cloth,
     and yet more layers cushion the blow and reduce the damage you do.

Cloak of Irritation.
     This cloak not only envelops its wearer but aggravates all who see it.

Ego Gloves:
-----------
Gloves of Free Action.
     The wearer of these gloves will find himself resistant to paralyzing
     attacks as well as some slowing attacks.  Because of the special 
     nature of these gloves, magic users may wear these gloves without
     incurring a mana penalty.   

Gloves of Slaying.
     These gloves will increase the wearer's fighting ability by boosting
     the wearer's to-hit and to-dam values.

Gloves of Agility.
     These gloves will increase the wearer's dexterity.  Because of the 
     special nature of these gloves, magic users may wear these gloves 
     without incurring a mana penalty.   

Gauntlets of Combat.
     These spiked gauntlets will boost the wearer's strength as well as the 
     wearer's  to-hit and to-dam numbers. They can only be gauntlets and 
     cesti, not leather gloves.

Gloves of Thievery.
     These gloves will boost the wearer's dexterity and provide free action,
     so they can be worn by people who cast mage spells without penalty. 
     They also provide a bonus to-hit. They can only be thin leather gloves,
     not gauntlets or cesti.

Gauntlets of Weakness.
     These gauntlets sap your strength.

Gauntlets of Clumsiness.
     These gauntlets make you fumble.

Ego Boots:
----------
Boots of Slow Descent.
     These boots protect the wearer from the effects of small falls.

Boots of Stealth.
     These boots increase the wearer's stealth, like a Cloak of Stealth.

Boots of Free Action.
     The wearer of these boots will find himself resistant to paralyzing
     attacks as well as some slowing attacks.

Boots of Stability.
     The wearer of these boots will have a tendency to stay in one place 
     should he wish to: a nexus attack will be resisted, and will not 
     teleport the player or affect his stats. They also provide feather
     falling.

Boots of Speed.
     The wearer of these boots will become unnaturally fast.

Boots of Noise.
     The wearer of these boots will make great echoing stamps as he walks 
     around the dungeon, waking up and aggravating all monsters.

Boots of Slowness.
     They seem to be stuck to the ground, and you can hardly move at all 
     while wearing these things.

Apart from these there are some very rare and well-made armours in the
dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These include Shields of
Deflection, Adamantite Plate Mail, Mithril Plate Mail, Mithril Chain Mail,
and Shadow Cloaks.  The first four cannot be damaged by acid because of the
quality metals they contain.

There are rumors of unique "artifact" items in the dungeon - weapons and armor 
of all types. Many of these are more powerful than even the greatest ego-items:
some are weak and have little more than a name to recommend them. In all cases, 
and indeed if the player desires to find out the powers of an ego-item with
random powers, use of a scroll of *Identify* will reveal all the powers of any
given item.

