
--- Basic Attributes ---

Score:
     Sangband uses a scoring system.  You get points by defeating unique (named)
opponents.  The lower your total skills, the higher the score you get for a
given victory.  Your score never goes down:  Investing in skills after defeating
an opponent only has an effect on the points you get for future victories.
     Because there are relatively few limits on skill advancement, you can
become very strong indeed before you fight opponents.  However, those who buy
fewer and less expensive skills to build their character get better scores.

Approximate equation:
     (250 * monster_depth * monster_depth), divided by
     (level of each skill, times the base cost of that skill, all summed
     together)

     - Plus:  +100% for defeating Morgoth, or +50% for defeating Sauron
     - Plus:  square_root(gold / 1000).
     - Choosing some difficulty options and races affects your score.

Experience:
     As you kill monsters, learn about objects by using or eating them, cast
spells and pray prayers for the first time, disarm traps, and unlock doors
(listed in descending order of importance), you gain experience.  Once earned,
experience can be spent on skills.

Power:
     Your power depends on the level and base cost of your skills.  The primary
effect of this is to increase hit points, but it also has other effects.  The
maximum power level is 100.

Gold:
     Gold is amazingly handy, because everything stores sell can be yours with
enough of the stuff.  Characters start out with an amount of gold determined by
stats (lower is better, except charisma, where higher is better).  Social class
greatly influences starting gold (higher is better).
      Within the Pits of Angband lies more gold than you will ever find, more
seams of treasure than you will ever dig, and more monsters carrying loot than
you will ever kill.

Hitpoints:
     Your hitpoints are your life wrapped up in a number; if they ever drop
below zero, you die.  Resting will restore hitpoints, but you should always have
some quicker way to heal yourself on hand.  Your maximum hitpoints depends on
your overall power and race, plus a constitution bonus (which can be
considerable).  It also varies according to skill:  Those who have taken the
Oath of Iron have the most hitpoints, Oath-bound magic-users have the fewest,
and all other characters fall somewhere in between.

Spellpoints:
     If you use magic, you will also have spellpoints, or mana.  Your maximum
mana depends on your magic power skill and your intelligence (if you are using
sorcery and necromancy) or wisdom (if you are using natural or holy magics).
Ways to recover mana faster than by resting are rare and greatly desired.
     Mana goes down if you wear heavy armor, or are in any shape other than your
normal one.

Armor Class:
     Armor class (AC) makes you harder to hit in melee, and reduces the damage
you take from almost all monster blows.  You can raise it by equipping more and
better armor, by increasing your Dexterity, and by activating various temporary
effects.  As time passes, you will find this value rising past 100, even to 150
and above at very high levels.

Fame and Titles:
     As word of your accomplishments spreads, you earn new titles.  Titles
describe what skills you're especially good at.
     You can also gain fame, especially by fulfilling quests.  The higher your
fame, the better the rewards you get from the Inn.

Luck:
     On rare occasions you can become unlucky.  Unlucky characters meet nastier
monsters and less interesting treasure.  Although there is no way to magically
restore lost luck, it slowly recovers as you continue to explore the dungeon.
     If you want to keep careful track of your luck, you can go into options ->
screen layout -> left panel, and activate the "luck" display.


--- Vital Statistics ---

     You have six primary statistics, or stats.  Each of them has important
effects, and how you juggle equipment to boost some stats at the expense of
others can greatly help or hinder your adventuring.  Deep in the dungeon,
potions exist that can permanently raise your stats.

Values for stats:
     Stats range from 3 to 18/220.  The progression of stats goes from 3 -> 17,
18, 18/10, 18/20 -> 18/220.  A value of 18/19 is the same as 18/10.
     The lowest any stat can go is 3, a level that greatly reduces any abilities
that stat influences.  The lowest "safe" figure for most stats is 7, but you
can't expect any significant bonuses until the stat reaches 18 or higher.  Once
you get a stat that high, further increases will greatly enhance your abilities,
eventually making it possible to slay some truly formidable monsters.  Stats top
out at 18/220.
     Stats depend on your internal stats, the equipment you are wearing, your
shapechange, and various temporary conditions.

Strength:
     Strength is critical to fighting effectively in melee and with missile
weapons.  Increases in Strength increase damage, allow you to get more blows
with heavier weapons, and boost the effectiveness of shield bashes.  Strength
also improves your tunneling ability, allows you to bear more weight without
being slowed down, and to wield heavier weapons effectively.

Intelligence:
     Intelligent characters use magic devices, pick locks, and disarm traps more
effectively.
     If you are using sorcery or necromancy, intelligence is your primary stat.
It controls how many spells you may learn, the amount of mana you have, and your
spell failure rate.  If you are using holy or natural magics, wisdom controls
all of these things.

Wisdom:
     Wise characters have a better chance of resisting magical spells cast upon
them by monsters.  Wisdom is a priest or druid's primary stat.

Dexterity:
     Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness.  A high dexterity may
allow you to get multiple blows with lighter weapons, and will significantly
increase your chances of hitting with any weapon and dodging blows from enemies.
Dexterity is also useful in picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting
yourself from some of the thieves that inhabit the dungeon.  It affects your
rate of recovery from stuns.

Constitution:
     Constitution determines your ability to resist physical damage and disease,
and your rate of recovery from poison, disease, and cuts.  It makes a great
difference to the amount of hitpoints you have and the speed at which you
recover them, and so is a vital stat for any character.

Charisma:
     Charisma represents a character's ability to influence others.  A character
with a high charisma will receive better prices from store owners, whereas a
character with a very low charisma will be robbed blind.


Intrinsic Modifiers:
     Learning any magic realm increases its spell stat by 2.  If you also take
the Oath associated with that realm, this bonus increases to 4.  Taking the Oath
of Iron increases the combat stats, and good wrestlers and users of Karate get
bonuses to strength and dexterity.


--- Abilities ---

     In addition to your stats, certain basic abilities define your character.
They depend on race, stats, and skill level, and may be powerfully influenced by
wielded equipment and temporary conditions.  You can most effectively keep track
of your abilities by using the Character screen.

Melee Ability:
     The higher your melee ability, the more frequently you will hit in hand-to-
hand combat and the more critical hits you will get.  Your race, dexterity,
melee weapon or barehanded skill, plusses to Skill on equipped items (except for
other weapons), and temporary effects are all factored into the skill value
displayed on your character screen.  This also holds true for missile and
throwing ability.

Shooting Ability:
     The higher your shooting ability, the more frequently you will hit with
missile weapons and the more critical hits you will get.

Throwing Ability:
     All sorts of things, from flasks of oil, to boulders, to potions and
mushrooms, can be thrown effectively.  The higher your throwing ability, the
more frequently you will hit with thrown objects, and the more damage and
critical hits you will get with special throwing weapons.

Saving Throw:
     The higher your saving throw, the more likely you are to resist the side
effects of monster blows and spells, traps, your own magic (when it fails), and
mental attacks.  Saving throw depends on race, wisdom, and your magic resistance
skill.

Stealth:
     The ability to move silently about is very useful.  If your stealth is good
enough, you can avoid fights, get in the first blow, and fight monsters one at a
time.  Stealth depends on race, your stealth skill, and equipped objects.

Disarming:
     The higher your disarming ability, the more quickly and safely you can pick
locks and disarm chests and traps.  Race, your disarming skill, dexterity,
intelligence, and equipped objects all affect this ability.

Magical Devices:
     Determines how likely you are to successfully use magical devices and most
activatable items - dragon scale mail being the exception.  Race, magical device
skill, intelligence, and equipped objects all affect this ability.  You need a
lot of skill to handle high-level wands, staffs, rods, rings, and amulets, and
also a fair amount for most other activatable items.  Confusion, hallucination,
blindness, stunning, fear, berserk rage, and necro rage all reduce your ability
to use magical devices.

Perception:
     The better your perception, the more likely it is that you will see traps
and secret doors automatically or by searching for them.  Perception depends on
race, perception skill, and equipped objects.
     Note that this ability has no direct relationship to your ability to sense
objects or hear monsters.

Infra-vision:
     The higher your infravision, the further away you can see warm-blooded
creatures, even when invisible or not lit.


--- Conditions ---

     Your character may benefit or suffer from many different conditions.  The
most important ones are displayed on the bottom row of the main screen.  We
describe them as they are displayed, from left to right.

Hunger:
     You need to eat every so often.  If you eat too much, you become bloated
and slow down.  If you eat too little, you become hungry (no special effects),
weak (slower recovery), feel faint (pass out every so often), and finally starve
(take damage every turn).

Temporary conditions:
  Paralyzed : You cannot do ANYTHING until the effects wear off.
  Wounds    : Instead of recovering battle damage, you take additional damage
              every turn.
  Stunning  : Your combat and spellcasting abilities decrease - slightly when
              stunned, considerably when heavily stunned.  If you are too
              heavily stunned, you can be knocked out!
  Blindness : You cannot see most monsters, it is harder to learn about objects
              or what's around you, and get only vague information when many
              things happen.  You often miss monsters, and cannot cast spells
              or read scrolls.
  Confusion : You move and attack in random directions, cannot cast spells or
              read scrolls, and have difficulty using magical devices.
  Hallucination : You see weird stuff everywhere, cannot target anything, cannot
              cast spells or read scrolls, and have difficulty using magical
              devices.
  Poison    : Instead of recovering battle damage, you take additional damage
              every turn.
  Disease   : Similar, but is harder to recover from.
  Fear      : You cannot attack monsters in melee, and find it slightly more
              difficult to use missile weapons, throw things, cast spells, or
              use magical devices.
  Recall    : You are about to teleport to the surface, or to the deepest level
              of the dungeon that you have ever visited.
  Darkness  : You are standing in darkness and have no light source.  You can only
              read some scrolls (mostly dealing with escape and light/darkness)
			  and only priests and necromancers can cast spells.  Without
			  infravision, you will have trouble with many things.

     There are many other temporary conditions, most of which are explained by
the objects or spells that cause them.

State:
     You can sometimes be in one of several different states.

  Rest      : You are resting (doubles the rate at which you recover HPs and
              mana).
  Repeat    : You are repeating an action (like tunneling).
  Sneaking  : You are sneaking around (greatly improves your stealth, but slows
              you down)
  Crossing  : You are traversing rough or difficult terrain

Speed:
     The faster you are, the less time you take to perform all kinds of actions.
It is vital not to become too slow.  As you descend into the dungeon, you need
to find ways to hasten yourself temporarily and permanently.
     A speed of +10 is double speed ("fast"), and one of +20 is triple speed
("very fast").  A speed of -10 is half speed ("slow"), and one of -20 is one
third speed ("very slow").
     Permanent speed bonuses add to your base speed.  Temporary effects may
increase or reduce speed by 10.

Depth:
     How deep in the dungeon you are.  This display may be colored:  Greys
indicate relative safety, whites normal conditions, yellow-orange-red indicate
increasing danger or rewards, and violet means that you are on a special level.
















