=== Monsters ===

The surface and depths of Angband are populated with a variety of
hostile denizens. Monsters are represented by the letters 'a'
through 'z' and capital letters 'A' through 'Z'. In addition,
mushroom patches, represented by ',', creeping coins, represented
by '$' and trees, represented by '<' can be encountered. Rumor
has it that the objects in the dungeon at deeper levels can
sometimes be hostile.

Most monsters will move around the dungeon, which is the first
indication of their presence. You may hear them before you see
them, when they bash down a door ('You hear a door burst open.'),
cast a teleportation spell ('It blinks away.'), are injured
by traps and magic spells ('It cries out in pain.') or when it
summons monsters ('You hear distant chanting.'). If a monster
alters a feature you have already learnt about, you will see
the feature change to an unknown location (' '). Some monsters
will leave trails of slime or (if injured) blood as they move,
and monsters moving through or under some types of terrain will
leave a trail.

Monsters can attack you by moving into you. Monsters can also
cast a variety of spells, to hurt or hinder you, protect or
heal themselves or summon allies. The danger of attacks and
spells increases greatly after 1500' in the dungeon. In
particular, dragons and some other kinds of monsters have
breath weapons that can be instantly fatal to even the most
powerful of characters if they are not forewarned and suitably
protected. You can use detection magics to determine what
monsters are located nearby, but out of sight. If a monster is
visible, but not currently on-screen, there will be the
label (off-screen) next to the monster name whenever it is
displayed. In addition, some monsters can use dungeon terrain
to hide themselves from attacks and spells. If you have
detected one of these monsters, it will have the label
(hidden) next to its name. Even though you know about it, you
will not be able to attack it until it comes out of hiding,
except with particular kinds of destructive or indirect
magic.

=== General Tips ===

Monster name and color can be a very useful indicator of
what powers and danger it represents. If you have not seen
a monster with the character and color of this kind before,
proceed very carefully. You can use 'probing' magic to
determine some additional information about the monster.
In addition, particular colors of monsters across different
species will have the same kind of attacks. If you have had
problems with a monster with a similar name or color before,
you should be cautious around it. Be particularly wary of
moving next to an unknown monster. There are a large number
of different attacks that can cripple or kill you if you
are not suitably protected. Non-moving monsters specialise in
these sorts of attacks, and are often much harder to kill than
an equivelent mobile monster at the same depth.

If a monster has a name or title of some form, then it is more
powerful than its brethren. In particular, unique monsters are
much harder to defeat then other monsters at the same depth.
If you encounter a uniquely named monster, give a lot of thought
towards preparing for the fight, and the possibility of fleeing.
Some unique monsters are accompanied by large escorts of their
fellows: much larger than the equivelent monster groups you
will initially encounter. The unique may also blend in with its
fellows, so if you are inattentive, you may find yourself in
much worse trouble than you expect.

If a monster is slower than you, you can attack it, and then
step back, preventing it from retalliating. By the same token,
you will not be able to successfully flee a monster that is
much faster than you. Try to minimise the number of monsters
adjacent to you, to lower your risk, and against spell casters,
minimise the number of monsters that can actually see you.
Against monsters that summon allies, take this a step further
and try to minimise all space around you, even to the extent
of tunnelling into the walls to create a hidey-hole. Both the
summoner and summoned monsters are not able to call on further
reinforcements for a short while after summoning, so you may
wish to take advantage of this period to eliminate as many
as possible before further help arrives.

Monsters that fly or climb are able to move past each other
with ease, so even restricting the adjacent space available
may not help against these enemies. In addition, they are
able to travel safely over a lot of dangerous terrain that
you cannot, so be sure to fight these creatures away from those
locations. Swimming and digging monsters are similiarly
benefitted by being able to hide in water or earth, preventing
you from attacking them unless they expose themselves. Tunnelling
monsters on the other hand can simply destroy walls by moving
through them, and ghosts and other insubstantial monsters may
pass through the same walls as if they weren't there.
 
=== Commands to Interact with Monsters ===

The following commands are of particular interest for interacting with
monsters:

Movement commands (;) (-) (.) (,) (12346789) or (yuhjklbn)
	Firstly, any movement command that accepts a direction
	will attack a hostile monster if one is in that direction (Even if
	invisible). Hidden monsters will be pushed over however.

Cast a spell (m)
        To cast a spell, you must have previously learned the spell and
        must have in your inventory a book from which the spell can be
        read.  Each spell has a chance of failure which starts out fairly
        large but decreases as you gain levels.  If you don't have enough
        mana to cast a spell, you will be prompted for confirmation.  If
        you decide to go ahead, the chance of failure is greatly increased,
        and you may lose a point of constitution.  Since you must read the
        spell from a book, you cannot be blind or confused while casting,
        and there must be some light present.  This command takes some energy.

Activate an artifact (A)
        You have heard rumors of special weapons and armor deep in the
        Pits, items that can let you breathe fire like a dragon or light
        rooms with just a thought.  Should you ever be lucky enough to
        find such an item, this command will let you activate its special
        ability.  Special abilities can only be used if you are wearing or
        wielding the item.  This command takes some energy.

Aim a wand (a) or Zap a wand (z)
        Wands must be aimed in a direction to be used.  Wands are magical
        devices, and therefore there is a chance you will not be able to
        figure out how to use them if you aren't good with magical
        devices.  They will fire a shot that affects the first object or
        creature encountered or fire a beam that affects anything in a
        given direction, depending on the wand.  An obstruction such as a
        door or wall will generally stop the effects from traveling any
        farther.  This command requires a direction and can use a target.
        This command takes some energy.

Use a staff (u) or Zap a staff (Z)
        This command will use a staff.  A staff is normally very similar
        to a scroll, in that they normally either have an area effect or
        affect a specific object.  Staves are magical devices, and there
        is a chance you will not be able to figure out how to use them.
        This command takes some energy.
 
Zap a rod (z) or Activate a rod (a)
        Rods are extremely powerful magical items, which cannot be burnt
        or shattered, and which can have either staff-like or wand-like
        effects, but unlike staves and wands, they don't have charges.
        Instead, they draw on the ambient magical energy to recharge
        themselves, and therefore can only be activated once every few
        turns.  The recharging time varies depending on the type of rod.
        This command may require a direction (depending on the type of
        rod, and whether you are aware of its type) and can use a target.
        This command takes some energy.

Fire an item (f) or Fire an item (t)
        You may fire an arrow, bolt or shot at a monster, provided you
	are wielding the correct launcher for that ammunition.
        If you throw something at a creature, your chances of hitting it
        are determined by your pluses to hit, your ability at throwing,
        and the object's pluses to hit.  Once the creature is it, the
        object may or may not do any damage to it.  Fire or Throw requires
        a direction.  Targeting mode (see the next command) can be invoked
        with "*" at the "Direction?" prompt.  This command takes some energy.

Throw an item (v)
        You may throw any object carried by your character.  The lighter
        the object, the farther you can throw it.  Only one object from a
        stack may be thrown at a time.  Throwing an object may break it.
        If you throw something at a monster, your chances of hitting it
        are determined by your pluses to hit, your ability at throwing,
        and the object's pluses to hit.  If the object hits the monster,
        it may or may not do damage.  Some objects, such as weapons, or
        flasks of oil, can do a substantial amount of damage.  This
        command requires a direction, and can take a target.  This command
        takes some energy.

Targeting Mode (*)
        This will allow you to aim your spells and such at a specific
        monster or grid, so that you can point directly towards that
        monster or grid (even if this is not a "compass" direction) when
        you are asked for a direction.  You can set a target using this
        command, or you can set a new target at the "Direction?" prompt when
        appropriate.  At the targeting prompt, you have many options.  First
        of all, targetting mode starts targetting nearby monsters which can
        be reached by "projectable" spells and thrown objects.  In this mode,
        you can press "t" (or "5" or ".") to select the current monster,
        space to advance to the next monster, "-" to back up to the previous
        monster, direction keys to advance to a monster more or less in that
        direction, "r" to "recall" the current monster, "q" to exit targetting
        mode, and "p" (or "o") to stop targetting monsters and enter the mode
        for targetting a location on the floor or in a wall.  Note that if
        there are no nearby monsters, you will automatically enter this mode.
        Note that hitting "o" is just like "p", except that the location
        cursor starts on the last examined monster instead of on the player.
        In this mode, you use the "direction" keys to move around, and the
        "q" key to quit, and the "t" (or "5" or ".") key to target the cursor
        location.  Note that targetting a location is slightly "dangerous",
        as the target is maintained even if you are far away.  To cancel an
        old target, simply hit "*" and then ESCAPE (or "q").  Note that when
        you cast a spell or throw an object at the target location, the path
        chosen is the "optimal" path towards that location, which may or may
        not be the path you want.  Sometimes, by clever choice of a location
        on the floor for your target, you may be able to convince a thrown
        object or cast spell to squeeze through a hole or corridor that is
        blocking direct access to a different grid.  Launching a ball spell
        or breath weapon at a location in the middle of a group of monsters
        can often improve the effects of that attack, since ball attacks are
        not stopped by interposed monsters if the ball is launched at a target.
        
Look around (l) or Examine things (x)
        This command is used to look around at nearby monsters (to determine
        their type and health) and objects (to determine their type).  It is
        also used to find out what objects (if any) are under monsters, and
        if a monster is currently inside a wall, and what is under the player.
        When you are looking at something, you may hit space for more details,
        or to advance to the next interesting monster or object, or minus ("-")
        to go back to the previous monster or object, or a direction key to
        advance to the nearest interesting monster or object (if any) in that
        general direction, or "r" to recall information about the current
        monster race, or "q" or escape to stop looking around.  You always
        start out looking at "yourself".

Identify Symbol (/)
        Use this command to find out what a character stands for.  For
        instance, by pressing "/.", you can find out that the "." symbol
        stands for a floor spot.  When used with a symbol that represents
        creatures, the this command will tell you only what class of
        creature the symbol stands for, not give you specific information
        about a creature you can see.  To get that, use the Look command.

        There are three special symbols you can use with the Identify
        Symbol command to access specific parts of your monster memory.
        Typing Ctrl-A when asked for a symbol will recall details about
        all monsters, typing Ctrl-U will recall details about all unique
        monsters, and typing Ctrl-N will recall details about all
        non-unique monsters.

        If the character stands for a creature, you are asked if you want
        to recall details.  If you answer yes, information about the
        creatures you have encountered with that symbol is shown in the
        Recall window if available, or on the screen if not.  You can also
        answer "k" to see the list sorted by number of kills, or "p" to
        see the list sorted by dungeon level the monster is normally found
        on.  Pressing ESCAPE at any point will exit this command.

=== Monster Memories ===

There are hundreds of different creatures in the pits of Angband, many of
which have the same letter symbol and color on the screen.  The exact species
of a creature can be discovered by looking at it.  It is also very difficult
to keep track of the capabilities of various creatures.  Luckily, Angband
automatically keeps track of your experiences with a particular creature.
This feature is called the monster memory.  You monster memory recalls the
particular attacks of each creature (whether or not technically a monster)
which you have suffered, as well as recalling if you have observed them to
multiply or move erratically, or drop treasure, etc.  Otherwise you would
simply have to take notes, which is an unnecessary bother.

If you have killed enough of a particular creature, or suffered enough
attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you with information
not otherwise available, such as a armor class or hit dice.  These are not
explained, but may be useful to give the relative danger of each creature.
This memory can be passed on to a new character even after you die by means
of a reduced save file.


=== Monster Listings ===

                             Monsters
 
            $   Creeping Coins      ,   Mushroom Patch
	    <   Tree                ?=! Mimic
            a   Giant Ant           A   Ancient Dragon
            b   Giant Bat           B   Bird
            c   Giant Centipede     C   Canine (Dog/Wolf)
            d   Young Dragon        D   Mature Dragon
            e   Floating Eye        E   Elemental
            f   Feline (Cat)        F   Fish/Octopus/Whale
            g   Golem               G   Ghost
            h   Hobbits/Dwarves     H   Hybrid
            i   Icky-Thing          I   Insect
            j   Jelly               J   Snake
            k   Goblin              K   Killer Beetle
            l   Elf                 L   Lich
            m   Mold                M   Maia
            n   Naga                N   Nightsbane
            o   Orc                 O   Ogre
            p   Human "priest"      P   Giant "person"
            q   Human "mage" 	    Q   Quadreped
            r   Rodent              R   Reptile/Amphibian
            s   Skeleton            S   Spider/Scorpion/Tick
            t   Human "warrior"     T   Troll
            u   Minor Demon         U   Major Demon
            v   Vortex              V   Vampire
            w   Worm or Worm Mass   W   Wight/Wraith
            x   (unused)            X   Xorn/Xaren
            y   Hydra               Y   Yeti
            z   Zombie/Mummy/Ghoul  Z   Zephyr Hound


Creeping Coins ($)
	These monsters resemble piles of treasure in the dungeon,
	but they move! It is rumored their bodies remain indistinguishable
	from treasure after they are killed.

Mushroom Patch (,)
	These monsters resemble harmless mushrooms, but release spores
	that affect those nearby in a variety of ways. After they are killed
	the individual mushrooms in the patch may be consumed. But most
	mushrooms found this way are poisonous.

Tree (<)
	Great trees grow deep in the earth, magically sustained and often
	aware of their surroundings. They are usually immobile, but hard to
	kill.

Mimic (?=! and maybe others)
	Monsters that resemble common dungeon objects are rumored to exist
	deep in the dungeon. Beware trying to pick one of these up, as it
	will attack you instead!

Giant Ant (a)
	These ants have grown far beyond their normal size, perhaps breed
	by Morgoth or hatched from the eggs of a great queen living deep
	in the earth.

Ancient Dragon (A)
	Ancient Dragons are the eldest and most knowledgeable and dangerous
	of their kind. Their breath is deadly, their spells and attacks occur
	at great speed and they guard powerful treasures. It is rumored that
	they are held sway over by even an even greater kind.

Giant Bat (b)
	Giant Bats congregate in large flocks in the dungeon, looking for
	a tasty morsel on which to feed. There are also hybrids of bat and
	dragonnish blood, which have the breath of their parent dragon.

Bird (B)
	Many birds from the ancient bloodlines have fallen under Morgoth's
	sway, and act as spys and fast moving messengers for him and his
	minions.

Giant Centipede (c)
	These multi-legged predators are quick moving and hungry. There are
	two kinds: centipedes of enormous size, and monstrous crawlers of
	various sorts, with mouths surrounded by paralyzing tentacles.

Canine (C)
	Dogs and wolves have both worked alongside and been the bane of
	mankind. These slavering beasts usually appear in packs, move quickly
	and attack all at once.

Young Dragon (d)
	Baby and young dragons struggle down from hatcheries near the surface
	to feed on the larger prey deeper in the dungeon. Do not dismiss them,
	they are still dangerous to the unprepared and unskilled.

Mature Dragon (D)
	These feared beasts of legend have powerful attacks and a deadly
	breath of some kind. They are also spell casters, when it suits
	them. Their cousins, the drakes, are a more magical offshoot.

Floating Eye (e)
	Magical eyes act as spies, guardians and servants. They are
	powerfully magic, and their gaze can entrap you from across a room.

Elemental (E)
	Magical beings originating from the elemental planes. The naturally
	occuring spirits and the more powerful elementals are made of
	one of the four elements, or a dangerous mix of two. The intelligent
	sorcerors of these planes, the djinn or genies, may also be encountered
	as well as invisible servitors constructed from pure elemental force.

Felines (f)
	Sauron, one of Morgoth's most powerful servants, often appeared in
	the shape of a cat. And the many felines in Angband are testament
	to the quickness and deadliness of such a form.

Fish (F)
	Dangerous fish and marine mammals lurk in the underground waters, silent
	and deadly predators. Only a few, rare magical forms, are encountered
	outside these waters, however.

Golems (g)
	Animated statues of various materials, golems often move slowly
	and can easily be avoided. Their creators have given some golems
	the ability to use a few dangerous spells. Do not fall victim to
	the powerful blows of their stoney limbs.

Ghosts (G)
	Insubstantial spirits of the damned wandering the dungeon, ghosts come
	in three varieties: various noisesome spirits, who are invisible,
	and insubstantial but whose presence is betrayed by the sound of their
	voice, disturbed souls, who are invisible and insubstantial, and whose
	touch reflects their fate in life, and various apparitions, who are
	visible and insubstantial, and whose terrifying appearance often spells
	a quite fate at hand.

Hobbits, Dwarfs and Gnomes (h)
	These three races have no great inclination to good or evil, and many
	have fallen into the pay, or worse, of darker powers. Many different
	professions of these races may be encountered, but their natural
	tendencies will predominate.

Hybrids (H)
	Mixes of mammal, bird and reptile, hybrids include the dangerous
	mythological beasts of legend, and cross-bred horrors in which
	so many beasts are intermingled, they become indistinguishable masses
	of claws, fangs, and flesh.

Icky-things (i)
	Small, semi-intelligent slimy creatures, these may be under-estimated
	in their abilities, especially in never-before encountered varieties.

Insects (I)
	Giant insects and insect swarms threaten you with their painful stings
	and bites. Be particularly wary of lice and other fast-breeding pests,
	with can be individually defeated very easily, but which quickly fill the
	dungeon with their swarms, and dragonflies, which use the breath
	of dragons against you.





	
	
		
	