=== Creating a Character ===

Cthangband  is  a  role-playing game, in which  you,  the  player,
control  a  character in the world of the Dreamlands. Perhaps  the
most  important thing you control is the birth of your  character,
in  which you choose or allow to be chosen various attributes that
will affect the future life of your character. Character creation,
or  birth,  is  controlled  through a variety  of  choices  as  to
constraints on the type of character you wish to play, followed by
a  series of random calculations to generate ('roll up') a  random
character matching the appropriate constraints.

Once  your  character has been generated, you will  be  given  the
choice  to  generate a new character obeying the same constraints.
Once  you  have generated more than one character, you can  switch
back  and forth between the two most recent characters, until  you
are  presented with a personality that you feel comfortable  with.
You  may start the entire process over at any time. Once you  have
accepted  a  character you will asked to provide a  name  for  the
character (although a randomly generated name will be provided).

In  general the actual choice of a name is not important, but keep
in  mind  that  it  may have some effect on the game  itself.  For
example,  on  some  machines, the character  name  determines  the
filename  that  will  be used to save the character  to  disk.  On
others, the character name specifies special 'pref' files. And the
character name is used on the high score list.

=== Character Characteristics ===

Each character has three primary attributes, sex, race, and class,
that  are chosen before the character is generated, and which will
stay fixed for the entire life of that character. These attributes
have  many effects, which will be mentioned as they come up.  Keep
in  mind that in the current version of Cthangband your choice  of
race may restrict your choice of class.

Each  character  has a few secondary attributes,  height,  weight,
social   class,  and  background  history,  which   are   randomly
determined,  but  which are affected by the sex and  race  of  the
character.  In general, these attributes are only used to  provide
'flavour'  to  the character, to assist in the role  playing,  but
they  do  have  a  few  minor effects on the  game.  For  example,
background history affects social class, which affects the  amount
of  money  the  character  will start  with.  And  weight  affects
carrying capacity and bashing ability.

Each   character   also   has  six  primary   'stats',   strength,
intelligence, wisdom, dexterity, constitution, and charisma, which
modify the abilities of the character in a variety of ways.  Every
stat  has a numerical value, ranging from a minimum of 3, up to  a
normal  maximum  of  18,  and even higher, into  the  'percentile'
range,  represented as '18/01' through '18/100'.  Actually,  every
stat  can be raised even above 18/100 by magical means,  up  to  a
pure   maximum  of  18/220,  which  is  represented  as  '18/***'.
Traditionally, a percentile stat such as '18/50' has  been  though
of as representing a value part way between 18 and 19, and this is
one way to think of them. However, often, the best way to view the
'bonus'  values  after the '18/' is as 'tenth'  points,  since  it
often  takes the same magic to raise a stat from, say, 4 to 5,  or
16  to  17,  as  it does from, say, 18/40 to 18/50. The  important
thing  to  remember  is  that  almost  all  internal  calculations
'ignore'  the  final digit of any 'bonus', so that,  for  example,
'18/40' and '18/49' are always have the same effects.

During  character generation, each stat is rolled out as a  number
from  8 to 17, with a normal distribution, and is then immediately
modified  based  on  the  race and class of  the  character.  Each
character  also  has  several primary 'skills',  disarming,  magic
devices,  saving  throws,  stealth, searching  ability,  searching
frequency,  fighting skill, and shooting skill, which are  derived
from  the  character's  race, class,  level,  stats,  and  current
equipment. These skills have rather obvious effects, but  will  be
described more completely below.

Each  character may have one or more 'racially intrinsic  skills',
based  on  the  race of the character. These may  include  special
resistances, or even abilities such as infravision. Each character
has  experience  points, which increase as the  character  becomes
more  experienced  and a level which is based both  on  experience
points  and also on race and class. As your experience  rises,  so
does  your level, and as your level rises, certain other abilities
and characteristics rise as well.

Deep  down  inside, the real objective of the game is to  increase
your  experience, and certain other characteristics, and  also  to
collect  useful  items, to give you a decent  chance  against  the
Elder Gods. Certain monsters can 'drain' your experience, and thus
your level, which will cause you to lose all of the effects of the
higher  level. Luckily, you can restore drained experience through
magical  means,  or  by simply regaining the experience  all  over
again.

Each  character has some gold, which can be used to buy items from
the  shops  in the town, and which can be obtained not  only  from
selling  items  to  the shops, but also by  taking  it  from  dead
monsters  and by finding it hidden in the dungeon. Each  character
starts  out  with some gold, the amount of which is based  on  the
characters  social class (higher is better), charisma  (higher  is
better) and other stats (less powerful characters start with  more
gold).  Each  character also starts out with a few  useful  items,
which may be kept, or sold to a shopkeeper for more gold.

Each  character  has an armour class, representing  how  well  the
character  can  avoid damage. Dexterity and the  equipment  affect
this armour class. Each character has hit points, representing how
much  damage  the character can sustain before he dies.  Your  hit
points are derived from your race, class, level, and constitution,
and can be temporarily boosted by magical means. Hit points may be
regained by resting, or by a variety of magical means.

Each  character  has spell points, or mana, which  represents  how
many  spells  (or  prayers) a character can cast (or  pray).  Your
spell  points are derived from your class, level, and intelligence
(for spells) or wisdom (for prayers). Spell points may be regained
by resting, or by a few magical means.

=== Races ===

There  are  thirty  different races that you can  choose  from  in
Cthangband.  Some races are restricted as to what profession  they
may  be,  and  each race has its own adjustments to a  character's
stats and abilities. Most races also have intrinsic abilities.

BARBARIAN: Barbarians are hardy men of the north. They are  fierce
in  combat, and their wrath is feared throughout the world. Combat
is  their life: they feel no fear, and they learn to enter  battle
frenzy  at  will  even  sooner than half-trolls.  Barbarians  are,
however,  suspicious  of magic, which makes magic  devices  fairly
hard  for  them to use, and also makes it impossible for  them  to
play  Mages. They cannot play Paladins, either, because their wild
bloodlust  is  totally incompatible with the strict discipline  of
knighthood.

BROO: This race is a blasphemous abomination produced by Chaos. It
is  not  an independent race but rather a humanoid creature,  most
often  a  human, twisted by the Chaos, or a nightmarish crossbreed
of  a  human and a beast. All broo are accustomed to Chaos so much
that  they  are  untroubled by confusion and sound,  although  raw
chaos  can still have effects on them. Broo revel in chaos, as  it
twists  them  more and more. Broo are subject to  mutations:  when
they  have  been  created, they receive a random  mutation.  After
that, every time they advance a level they have a little chance of
gaining yet another mutation.

CYCLOPS:  With but one eye, a cyclops can see more than many  with
two  eyes.  They are headstrong, and loud noises bother them  very
little.  They  are  not  quite  qualified  for  the  magic   using
professions,  but  as  a  certain Mr Ulysses  can  testify,  their
accuracy with thrown rocks can be deadly...

DARK ELF: Another dark, cave-dwelling race, likewise unhampered by
darkness  attacks,  the  Dark Elves  have  a  long  tradition  and
knowledge of magic. With their intelligence they can become superb
mages  or priests, and they have an inherent magic missile  attack
available to them at a low level. With their keen sight, they also
learn  to see invisible things as their relatives, the High-Elves,
do but at a higher level.

DRACONIAN:  A humanoid race with dragon-like attributes.  As  they
advance levels, they gain new elemental resistances (up to  Poison
Resistance),  and  they also have a breath weapon,  which  becomes
more powerful with experience. The exact type of the breath weapon
depends on the draconian's class and level. With their wings, they
can easily escape any pit trap unharmed.

DWARF:  Dwarves are the headstrong miners and fighters of  legend.
Since dungeons are the natural home of a dwarf, they are excellent
choices  for a warrior or priest. Dwarves tend to be stronger  and
tougher  but slower and less intelligent than humans are.  Because
they  are so headstrong and are somewhat wise, they resist  spells
that  are  cast on them. Dwarves also have very good  infra-vision
because  they  live  underground. They do have one  big  drawback,
though. Dwarves are loudmouthed and proud, singing in loud voices,
arguing  with  themselves  for  no  good  reason,  screaming   out
challenges  at  imagined  foes. In other  words,  dwarves  have  a
miserable  stealth. They can never be blinded. Dwarves also  learn
to  study the structure of a dungeon, and can spot things that  go
unseen by the other races.

ELF:  Elves are better magicians then humans, but not as  good  at
fighting. They tend to be smarter and faster than either humans or
half-elves  do  and also have better wisdom. Elves are  better  at
searching,  disarming, perception, stealth, bows, and  magic,  but
they  are not as good at hand weapons. Elves may choose any  class
except Paladin. They resist light effects intrinsically.

GNOME:  Gnomes are smaller than dwarves but larger than halflings.
They,  like the halflings, live in the earth in burrow-like homes.
Gnomes  make  excellent mages, and have very good  saving  throws.
They  are  good at searching, disarming, perception, and  stealth.
They  have lower strength than humans do so they are not very good
at  fighting with hand weapons. Gnomes have fair infra- vision, so
they can detect warm-blooded creatures at a distance. A gnome  may
choose between being a warrior, mage, priest, or rogue. Gnomes are
intrinsically  protected  against  paralysis  and   some   slowing
effects. At higher levels, Gnomes learn to teleport at will.

GOLEM A golem is an artificial creature, built from a lifeless raw
material  like  clay,  and  awakened  to  life.  They  are  nearly
mindless, making them useless for professions that rely on  magic,
but as warriors they are very tough. They are resistant to poison,
they  can see invisible things, and move freely. At higher levels,
they  also become resistant to attacks that threaten to drain away
their  life force. They also learn to temporarily turn their  skin
into a very hard, stonelike substance. In the most recent version,
golems gain very little nutrition from ordinary food. They need to
collect  scrolls  of satisfy hunger, or perish of exhaustion  when
the  life force animating their body runs out. In the most  recent
version  golems  also gain natural armor class  bonus  from  their
tough body.

GREAT ONE: The Great Ones are a reputedly immortal race, who  pass
for gods in the Dreamlands. They are fond of taking mortal lovers,
though,  and many humans have some Great-One blood. They are  very
tough and enduring and their constitution cannot be reduced. Their
ability  to  heal  wounds far surpasses that of  any  other  race.
Having  seen virtually everything very little is new to them,  and
they gain levels much slower than the other races. But should they
advance  high enough, they will learn the innate powers  of  their
kind and be able to alter the very fabric of the Dreamlands.

HALF-ELF: Half-elves tend to be smarter and faster than  a  human,
but  not  as strong. Half- elves are slightly better at searching,
disarming, saving throws, stealth, bows, and magic, but  they  are
not  as good at hand weapons. Half-elves may choose any class  and
do not receive any intrinsic abilities.

HALF-GIANT: Half-Giants are not too unusual, as there has  been  a
tradition according to which it is a noble and brave thing  to  do
to  consort  a giant (especially a giant-maid). Nevertheless,  the
poor offspring of such a union is seldom very popular in the world
of men. Their limited intelligence makes it impossible for them to
become  full spellcasters, but with their huge strength they  make
excellent  warriors. They also love to wander in  the  wilderness,
and can become rangers. No ordinary wall can withstand the fury of
a  giant, or a half-giant, and at higher levels they can learn the
power of magical digging. Their thick skin makes them resistant to
shards,  and  like  Half-Ogres and Half-Trolls,  they  have  their
strength sustained.

HALF-OGRE: Half-Ogres are like Half-Orcs, but only more  so.  They
are  big,  bad,  and  stupid.  For warriors,  they  have  all  the
necessary attributes, and they can even become wizards: after all,
they  are  related to Ogre Magi, from whom they have  learned  the
skill  of  setting trapped runes once their level is high  enough.
Like  Half-  Orcs they resist darkness, and like Half-Trolls  they
have their strength sustained.

HALF-ORC:  Half-Orcs make excellent warriors and  decent  priests,
but  are terrible at magic. They are as bad as dwarves at stealth,
and  horrible  at searching, disarming, and perception.  Half-Orcs
are, let's face it, ugly. They tend to pay more for goods in town.
Half-Orcs do make good warriors and rogues, for the simple  reason
that  Half-Orcs tend to have great constitutions and lots  of  hit
points.  Because of their preference to living underground  to  on
the  surface,  half-orcs  resist darkness attacks.  Upon  reaching
experience level 3, a half-orc learns to dispel any fear that  may
be upon him or her.

HALF-TITAN:  Half-mortal descendants of the mighty  titans,  these
immensely  powerful creatures put almost any other race to  shame.
They  may  lack  the fascinating special powers of  certain  other
races,  but their enhanced attributes more than make up for  that.
They learn to estimate the strengths of their foes, and their love
for law and order makes them resistant to the effects of Chaos.

HALF-TROLL: Half-Trolls are incredibly strong, and have  more  hit
points  than  any other character race. They are also very  stupid
and slow. They will make great warriors and iffy priests. They are
bad at searching, disarming, perception, and stealth. They are  so
ugly  that a Half-Orc grimaces in their presence. They also happen
to  be  fun  to  play... Half-trolls always  have  their  strength
sustained. At higher levels, Half-Trolls learn to enter a  berserk
fury, and regenerate wounds automatically.

HIGH-ELF: High-elves are a race of immortal beings dating from the
beginning of time. They are masters of all skills, and are  strong
and  intelligent, although their wisdom is sometimes suspect. They
can  play all classes except Paladin, and very well at that. High-
elves  begin their lives able to see the unseen, and resist  light
effects  just  like regular elves. However, there are  few  things
that  they have not seen already, and experience is very hard  for
them to gain.

HOBBIT:  Hobbits, or Halflings, are very good at  bows,  throwing,
and have good saving throws. They also are very good at searching,
disarming, perception, and stealth; so they make excellent rogues,
but  prefer  to be called burglars. They will be much weaker  than
humans  will, and no good at melee fighting. Halflings  have  fair
infravision,  so  they can detect warm creatures  at  a  distance.
Hobbits  can choose between being a warrior, mage, or rogue.  They
have  their dexterity sustained. They are very fond of  food,  and
learn,  in  due  time,  to cook a delicious  meal  from  available
ingredients.

HUMAN:  The  human  is  the base character. All  other  races  are
compared  to them. Humans can choose any class and are average  at
everything. Humans tend to go up levels faster than any other race
because  of  their  shorter life spans. No racial  adjustments  or
intrinsics occur to characters choosing human.

IMP:  A  demon-creature from the nether world, naturally resistant
to  fire  attacks, and capable of learning fire bolt and  fireball
attacks.  They  are little loved by other races, but  can  perform
fairly well in most professions.

KLACKON:  Klackons are bizarre semi-intelligent ant-like insectoid
creatures. They make great servants and warriors, but their mental
abilities  are  severely limited. Obedient and well ordered,  they
can  never  be  confused. They are also very  nimble,  and  become
faster  as  they  advance  levels.  They  are  also  very  acidic,
inherently resisting acid, and capable of spitting acid at  higher
levels.

KOBOLD:  Kobolds  are  a  weak goblin  race.  They  love  poisoned
weapons,  and  can learn to throw poisoned darts  (of  which  they
carry an unlimited supply). They are also inherently resistant  to
poison,  and can become adequate fighters, although they  are  not
one of the more powerful races.

MIND-FLAYER:  A  secretive  and  mysterious  ancient  race.  Their
civilization may well be older than any other on our  planet,  and
their intelligence and wisdom are naturally sustained, and are  so
great  that  they  enable  Mind Flayers to  become  more  powerful
spellcasters   than  any  other  race,  even  if  their   physical
attributes are a good deal less admirable. As they advance levels,
they  gain the powers of See Invisible, Telepathy and a mind blast
attack.

NIBELUNG:  The  hated  and persecuted race of  nocturnal  dwarves,
these  cave  dwellers  are not much bothered  by  darkness.  Their
natural  inclination  to magical items has  made  them  immune  to
effects  that  could drain away magical energy, and like  ordinary
dwarves, they can examine the dungeon to discover traps and secret
doors.

SKELETON: There are two types of skeletons: the ordinary, warrior-
like  skeletons,  and the spell-using skeletons,  which  are  also
called  liches.  As undead beings, skeletons need  to  worry  very
little  about poison or attacks that can drain life. They  do  not
really use eyes for perceiving things, and are thus not fooled  by
invisibility.  Their  bones are resistant to sharp  shrapnel  (not
much  to  cut  there), and they will quickly become  resistant  to
cold.  Should a skeleton be unlucky enough to lose some of his  or
her remaining life, he or she will learn to restore it at will. It
is  very hard for skeletons to eat food or drink potions. Although
the magical effects of these will affect the skeleton even without
entering  the skeleton's (non-existent) belly, the potion  /  food
itself   will  fall  through  the  skeleton's  jaws,   giving   no
nutritional benefit.

SPECTRE:  Another  powerful  undead creature:  the  spectre  is  a
ghastly  apparition, surrounded by an unearthly green  glow.  They
exist  only  partially on our plane of existence:  half-corporeal,
they can pass through walls, although the density of the wall will
hurt them in the process of doing this. The spectre can scream  an
eldritch  howl, which is enough to scare lesser monsters  witless.
As  undead,  they  have  a  firm hold on  their  life  force,  see
invisible, and resist poison and cold. They also resist nether; in
fact,  their half-corporeal form actually grows stronger from  the
effects  of  nether.  At  higher levels  they  develop  telepathic
abilities.  Spectres make superb spellcasters, but their  physical
form  is very weak. Like Golems and Zombies, Spectres gain  almost
no nutrition from ordinary food.

SPRITE:  One of the several faerie races, sprites are very  small.
They  have  tiny wings, and can fly over traps that  may  open  up
beneath them. They enjoy sunlight intensely, and need worry little
about  light based attacks. Although physically among the  weakest
races,  Sprites are very talented in magic, and can become  highly
skilled  wizards.  Sprites  have the  special  power  of  spraying
Sleeping Dust, and at higher levels they learn to fly faster.

VAMPIRE: One of the mightier undead creatures, the Vampire  is  an
awe-inspiring  sight.  Yet  this mighty  creature  has  a  serious
weakness: the bright rays of sun are its bane, and it will need to
flee  the  surface  to the deep recesses of earth  until  the  sun
finally  sets. Darkness, on the other hand, only makes the Vampire
stronger.  As  undead, the Vampire has a firm  hold  on  its  life
force,  and resists nether attacks. The Vampire also resists  cold
and  poison-based  attacks.  It is, however,  susceptible  to  its
perpetual  hunger for fresh blood, which can only be  satiated  by
sucking  the  blood from a nearby monster, which is the  Vampire's
special  power.  It  should  be noted that  the  vampires  are  so
sensitive to daylight that even certain artefact light items  that
are  filled with daylight will hurt them if they try to wield  the
items.  Fortunately, the vampires do not really need these  items,
since  they  radiate an aura of 'dark light' of their  own.  Light
resistance will, in any case, protect the vampire from the adverse
effects of sunlight.

YEEK:  Yeeks  are among the most pathetic creatures.  Fortunately,
their  horrible  screams can scare away less confident  foes,  and
their  skin becomes more and more resistant to acid, as they  gain
experience.  But  having said that, even a  mediocre  monster  can
proverbially wipe the floor with an unwary yeek.

ZOMBIE: Much like Skeletons, Zombies too are undead horrors:  they
are  resistant to life- draining attacks, and can learn to restore
their  life force. Like skeletons, they become resistant to  cold-
based attacks (actually earlier than skeletons), resist poison and
can   see  invisible.  While  still  vulnerable  to  cuts  (unlike
skeletons),  Zombies are resistant to Nether.  Like  golems,  they
gain  very  little  nutrition from the food of  mortals.  However,
Zombies  are, as the name implies, practically mindless:  in  this
company, Groo would seem a genius.

=== Classes ===

Once  a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class.  Some
classes  will not be available to certain races; for  instance,  a
Half-Troll  cannot become a Paladin. For the first few  adventures
it  is  suggested that you run a warrior or rogue.  Spell  casting
generally requires a more experienced player that is familiar with
survival techniques.

WARRIOR: A Warrior is a hack-and-slash character, who solves  most
of his problems by cutting them to pieces, but will occasion- ally
fall  back  on the help of a magical device. His prime  stats  are
Strength and Constitution, and a good Dexterity can really help at
times.  A Warrior will be good at Fighting and Throwing/Bows,  but
bad at most other skills. A Warrior learns no magic.

MAGE: A Mage must live by his wits. He cannot hope to simply  hack
his  way through the dungeon, and so must therefore use his  magic
to  defeat,  deceive, confuse, and escape. A mage  is  not  really
complete  without  an  assortment of magical  devices  to  use  in
addition  to  his spells. He can master the higher  level  magical
devices far easier than anyone else and has the best saving  throw
to  resist  effects  of  spells  cast  at  him.  Intelligence  and
Dexterity are his primary stats. There is no rule that says that a
mage  cannot become a good fighter, but spells are his true realm.
A  mage  can choose any two realms of magic in which he wishes  to
specialise, although the realm of Life always gives them trouble.

PRIEST: A Priest is a character of holy devotion. They explore the
dungeon only to destroy the evil that lurks within (except for the
dark  priests,  of course), and if treasure just happens  to  fall
into their packs, well, so much more to the glory of their church!
Priests  receive their spells from a deity, and therefore  do  not
choose  which  spells  they will learn.  They  are  familiar  with
magical  devices, preferring to call them instruments of god,  but
are  not as good as a mage in their use. Priests have well  saving
throws and make decent fighters, preferring blunt weapons to edged
ones.  Wisdom  and Charisma are the priest's primary stats.  There
are  two  types of priests: the Light Priests who are  trained  in
Life  magic,  and the dark Priests who have chosen to study  Death
magic  instead. In addition to their primary realm of magic  (Life
or  Death  magic),  they can select a secondary realm  from  Folk,
Planar, Nature, Chaos and Corporeal.

ROGUE: A Rogue is a character that prefers to live by his cunning,
but  is capable of fighting his way out of a tight spot. He is the
master  of traps and locks, no device being impossible for him  to
overcome. A rogue has a high stealth allowing him to sneak  around
many  creatures without having to fight, or sneak up and  get  the
first  blow.  A rogue's perception is higher than any other  class
and  many times he will notice a trap or secret door before having
to  search.  A  rogue  is better than warriors  or  paladins  with
magical  devices,  but  still can not rely on  their  performance.
Rogues can also learn a few spells, but not the powerful offensive
spells magi can use. A rogue's primary stats are Intelligence  and
Dexterity. Rogues who wish to specialise as burglars can choose to
study Sorcery while Death magic is available to rogues who wish to
become  Assassins.  Folk magic is available for 'common'  thieves,
and Planar magic for escapologists.

RANGER:  A Ranger is a warrior/mage. He is a good fighter and  the
best  of  the  classes with a missile weapon such as  a  bow.  The
ranger  learns spells much more slowly than a mage, but is capable
of  learning all but the most powerful spells. Because a ranger is
really a dual class character, more experience is required for him
to  advance.  A  ranger has a good stealth, good perception,  good
searching, a good saving throw, and is good with magical  devices.
His  primary stats are Intelligence and Dexterity. All rangers are
trained in Nature magic. They can also select a secondary realm of
magic  (from  Sorcery, Folk, Planar, Chaos and  Death)  but  their
skills  are more limited in the second realm than in their  native
Nature magic.

PALADIN: A Paladin is a warrior/priest. He is a very good fighter,
second  only  to the warrior class, but not very good  at  missile
weapons. He receives prayers at a slower pace then the priest, but
can  even receive the most powerful prayers. Because a paladin  is
really  a  dual  class character, it requires more  experience  to
advance him. A paladin lacks much in the way of abilities.  He  is
poor  at  stealth, perception, searching, and magical devices.  He
has  a decent saving throw due to his divine alliance. His primary
stats are Strength and Charisma. All paladins are trained in  Life
magic,  and  they regard the realms of magic as the Devil's  work.
The  variant class, the 'Death Knight', is trained in Death  magic
instead of Life magic.

WARRIOR-MAGE: A Warrior-Mage is precisely what the name suggests -
a  cross  between  the  warrior  and  mage  classes.  While  their
brothers,  the  Rangers, specialise in Nature magic  and  survival
skills,  true  Warrior-Mages attempt to reach  the  best  of  both
worlds.  As  magicians, they are trained in  Folk  magic  and  can
select  another realm, eventually learning every spell in both  of
them  (although slower than true magicians); as warriors they  are
far  superior to the usual Mage class. The Warrior-Mage is a truly
powerful class, which is recommended for the players who  want  to
cast spells but whose mages tend to die too quickly. However,  the
power  does  not come without a price: Warrior-Mages require  more
experience to advance levels than any other class.

CHAOS  WARRIOR:  Chaos  Warriors are the feared  servants  of  the
terrible Chaos Gods. Every Chaos Warrior has a Patron God, such as
Malia,  Thed  or  Vivamort. Whenever a Chaos  Warrior  advances  a
level, his Patron may reward him with a Gift of Chaos: he might be
healed  or polymorphed, his stats could be increased, or he  might
be  rewarded with an awesome weapon. Or his Patron might, for some
reason, get annoyed with him and do something fairly nasty to him,
like surrounding him with monsters, draining his stats or wrecking
his  equipment. Or they might simply ignore him. The of Chaos  are
(of  course) chaotic and unpredictable indeed. The exact  type  of
reward  depends  on  the  Patron  Lord  (different  Patrons   give
different  rewards)  and  chance. Chaos  Warriors  are  very  good
fighters, but they are also trained in Chaos magic, and can  learn
every Chaos spell.

CHAOS  MAGE:  These  spellcasters have given themselves  to  their
Patron  in  return  to great magical power. As well  as  receiving
gifts  in the same way as a Chaos Warrior, they also are extremely
skilled  in both Chaos magic and another realm of magic  of  their
choice.  This  magical skill comes with a price though.  The  only
weapons that may be used by a Chaos Mage are 'Chaotic' ones.

MONK:  The  Monk character class is very different from all  other
classes.  Although they can use weapons and armour just  like  any
other  class, their training in martial arts makes them much  more
powerful  with  no  armour  or weapons. To  gain  the  resistances
necessary  for survival at higher levels a monk may need  to  wear
some  kind of armour, but if the armour he wears is too heavy,  it
will  severely disturb his martial arts manoeuvres.  As  the  monk
advances  levels, new, powerful forms of attack become  available.
His   defensive  capabilities  (blocking  and  dodging)   increase
likewise, but if armour is being worn, their effect decreases.  It
is  rumoured  that the monastic training even makes  monks  faster
than  any  other character class! Fortunately, also the amount  of
armour  a  monk  can wear, while still fighting efficiently,  also
increases  with  experience. Monks  are  adept  with  the  use  of
Corporeal magic.

MINDCRAFTER: The Mindcrafter is a character who uses the powers of
mind  instead of magic. These powers are unique to the Mindcrafter
class,   and  vary  from  simple  extrasensory  powers  to  mental
domination  of  others. Since these powers are  developed  by  the
practice  of  certain  disciplines,  a  Mindcrafter  requires   no
spellbooks to use them. The available powers are simply determined
by  the character level. The Mindcrafter uses the wisdom score  to
determine how well he/she can perform the psychic powers,  and  in
combat  a  Mindcrafter  is  roughly the equivalent  of  a  priest,
although  a Mindcrafter is never penalized for wielding  an  edged
weapon  (unlike  a  priest). High Mage High Mages  are  specialist
Mages of the highest order. In most respects they are exactly like
ordinary  Mages,  although their spell stat  is  slightly  higher.
Instead of selecting two realms of magic, a High Mage selects only
one  realm  of  magic  and  studies  it  extremely  well,  gaining
substantial  benefits in mana costs, minimum  levels  and  failure
rates.

DRUID:  The druid is a specialist priest. Druids forego  Life  and
Death  magic to pursue study in the realm of Nature. In all  other
respects they are just like priests.

=== Stats ===

STRENGTH:  Strength is important in fighting with weapons  and  in
melee  combat. A high strength can improve your chances of hitting
as  well  as  the amount of damage done with each hit.  Characters
with  low strengths may receive penalties. Strength is also useful
in tunnelling and in carrying heavy items.

INTELLIGENCE: Intelligence affects the spellcasting  abilities  of
mage-like  spellcasters, mages, rangers, and rogues.  Intelligence
will  affect the number of spells you may learn each level as well
as the number of spell points you receive. A high intelligence may
also  improve  your chances of successfully casting a  spell.  You
cannot  learn  spells if your intelligence is 7 or lower.  A  good
intelligence  can  also  help with using  magic  devices,  picking
locks, and disarming traps.

WISDOM: The primary function of wisdom is to determine the ability
of  a  priest  or  paladin to use prayers, just like  intelligence
affects spellcasting. Again, high wisdom will increase the  number
of  spell  points you have and increase the number of prayers  you
can  learn  each level, while improving the chance that  a  prayer
will  be  successful. A good wisdom can also help to improve  your
chances of resisting magical spells cast upon you by monsters.

DEXTERITY: Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness.  A
high  dexterity may allow a character to get multiple  blows  with
lighter weapons, thus greatly increasing his kill power, and  will
increase his chances of hitting with any weapon and dodging  blows
from enemies. Dexterity is also useful in picking locks, disarming
traps,  and  protecting you from some of the thieves that  inhabit
the dungeons.

CONSTITUTION:  Constitution  is a character's  ability  to  resist
damage to his body, and to recover from damage received. Therefore
a  character with a high constitution will receive more hit points
and also recover them faster while resting.

CHARISMA:  Charisma  represents  a  character's  personality   and
physical appearance. A character with a high charisma will receive
better  prices from storeowners, whereas a character with  a  very
low  charisma may be robbed blind. A high charisma will also  mean
more starting money for the character.

=== Abilities ===

Characters possess some different abilities, which can  help  them
to  survive. The starting abilities of a character are based  upon
race  and  class. Abilities may be adjusted by high or low  stats,
and may increase with the level of the character.

FIGHTING:  Fighting  is  the ability to hit  and  do  damage  with
weapons or fists. Normally a character gets a single blow from any
weapon, but if his dexterity and strength are high enough, he  may
receive  more blows per round with lighter weapons (He will  still
attack  with  one  blow  at  a  time,  but  the  attacks  will  be
correspondingly quicker). Strength and dexterity both  modify  the
ability to hit an opponent. This skill increases with the level of
the character.

SHOOTING  ABILITY: The use of ranged missile weapons (and throwing
objects)  is  included  in this skill. Different  stats  apply  to
different  weapons, but this ability may modify  the  distance  an
object is thrown/fired, the amount of damage done, and the ability
to  hit  a  creature. This skill increases with the level  of  the
character.

SAVING  THROWS:  A Saving Throw is the ability of a  character  to
resist   the   effects  of  a  spell  cast  on  him   by   another
person/creature. This does not include spells cast on  the  player
by  his  own  stupidity, such as quaffing  a  nasty  potion.  This
ability  increases with the level of the character, but then  most
high level creatures are better at casting spells, so it tends  to
even out. A high wisdom also increases this ability.

STEALTH:  The  ability  to move silently  about  is  very  useful.
Characters with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents,
gaining  the  first blow. Also, creatures may  fail  to  notice  a
stealthy  character entirely, allowing a player to  avoid  certain
fights. This skill is based entirely upon race and class, and will
never improve unless magically enhanced.

DISARMING: Disarming is the ability to remove traps (safely),  and
includes  picking locks on traps and doors. A successful disarming
will  gain  the  character some experience. A trap must  be  found
before  it can be disarmed. Dexterity and intelligence both modify
the  ability to disarm, and this ability increases with the  level
of the character.

MAGICAL  DEVICES: Using a magical device such as a wand  or  staff
requires  experience and knowledge. Spell users such as  magi  and
priests  are therefore much better at using a magical device  than
say  a  warrior.  This  skill  is modified  by  intelligence,  and
increases with the level of the character.

PERCEPTION: Perception is the ability to notice something  without
actively  seeking it out. This skill is based entirely  upon  race
and class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.

SEARCHING:  To search is to actively look for secret doors,  floor
traps, and traps on chests. Rogues are the best at searching,  but
magi,  rangers,  and priests are also good at it.  This  skill  is
based  entirely upon race and class, and will never improve unless
magically enhanced.

=== Miscellaneous ===

INFRAVISION: Infravision is the ability to see heat sources. Since
most  of  the dungeon is cool or cold, infravision will not  allow
the  player  to see walls and objects. Infra-vision will  allow  a
character  to  see  any warm-blooded creatures  up  to  a  certain
distance. This ability works equally well with or without a  light
source.  The  majority of Cthangband's creatures are cold-blooded,
and will not be detected unless lit up by a light source. Most non-
human races have innate infravision ability. Human can gain infra-
vision only if it is magically enhanced.
