=== Creating a Character ===

Steamband is a roleplaying game, in which you, the player, control a character
in the world of Steamband.  Perhaps the most important thing you control is the
birth of your character, in which you choose or allow to be chosen various
attributes that will affect the future life of your character.

Character creation, or birth, is controlled through a variety of choices
as to constraints on the type of character you wish to play, followed by
a series of random calculations to generate ("roll up") a random character
matching the appropriate constraints.

Once your character has been generated, you will be given the choice to
generate a new character obeying the same constraints, and once you have
generated more than one character, you can switch back and forth between
the two most recent characters, until you are presented with a personality
that you feel comfortable with.

You may start the entire process over at any time.

Once you have accepted a character you will asked to provide a name for the
character.  In general, the actual choice of a name is not important, but do
keep in mind that it may have some effect on the game itself.  For example,
on some machines, the chatacter name determines the filename that will be
used to save the character to disk.  On others, the character name specifies
special "pref" files.  And the character name is used on the high score list.


=== Character Characteristics ===

Each character has three primary attributes, sex, race, and class, that
are chosen before the character is generated, and which will stay fixed
for the entire life of that character.  These attributes have many effects,
which will be mentioned as they come up.

Each character has a few secondary attributes, height, weight, social class,
and background history, which are randomly determined, but which are affected
by the sex and race of the character.  In general, these attributes are only
used to provide "flavor" to the character, to assist in the role playing, but
they do have a few minor effects on the game.  For example, background history
affects social class, which affects the starting money. (Not a lot, in the case
of some races: for instance, Half-Trolls are always going to be the scum of 
society, even if their father was the Clan Chief.) 

Each character also has six primary "stats", Muscle, Agility, Vigor,
Schooling, Ego, and Charm, which modify the abilities of the
character in a variety of ways.  Every stat has a numerical value, ranging
from a minimum of 1, up to a normal maximum of 700, and even higher, all
the way up to 999: 700 is the maximum that can be achieved intrinsically, 
for any given stat. Equipment may add bonuses or penalties to this, 
and raise the player's stats beyond the normal intrinsic limits: the stats may
go as high as they like, with the right choice of equipment, up to 999.

Each character also has a large selection of "skills", including such skills 
as disarming, magic devices, saving throws, stealth, searching, fighting skill,
and shooting skill. which skills you start with are derived from the character's 
race & class.  These skills have rather obvious effects, but will be described 
more completely below. What skills eventually become available to a character 
is determined by his / her class.

Each character may have one or more "racially intrinsic skills", based on
the race of the character.  These may include special resistances, or even
abilities such as infravision, or something more combat oriented such as
power strike.

Each character has experience, which increases as the character becomes more
experienced, and a level, which is based on experience, and also on race and
class.  As the experience rises, so does the level, and as the level rises,
certain other abilities and characteristics rise as well.  Deep down inside,
the real objective of the game is to increase your experience, and certain
other characteristics, and also to collect useful items, to give you a decent
chance against Morgoth.  Certain monsters can "drain" your experience, and
thus your level, which will cause you to lose all of the effects of the higher
level.  Luckily, you can restore drained experience through magical means, or
by simply regaining the experience all over again.

Each character has some gold, which can be used to buy items from the shops
in the town, and which can be obtained not only from selling items to the
shops, but also by taking it from dead monsters and by finding it hidden in
the dungeon.  Each character starts out with some gold, the amount of which
is based on the characters social class (higher is better), charm (higher
is better), and other stats (less powerful characters start with more gold).  
Each character also starts out with a few useful items, which may be kept, 
or sold to a shop-keeper for more gold. However, especially valuable items
will never sell for the full price, as each shopkeeper has a maximum that 
he is prepared to pay for any item. The more generous shopkeepers may buy 
your items for up to 30,000 gold pieces: but some are really stingy, and 
will pay no more than 5,000.

Each character has an armor class, representing how well the character can
avoid damage.  The armor class is affected by dexterity and the equipment. 
Armor class on equipment is always denoted in [square brackets], usually as 
a figure of [X,+Y] where X is the intrinsic AC of the armor in question, and 
Y is the magical bonus to armor class provided by that item.

Each character has hit points, representing how much damage the character can
sustain before he dies.  The maximum number of hit points is derived from your
race, class, level, and constitution, and you can never have more hit points
than the maximum.  Hit points may be regained by resting, or by a variety of
magical means.

Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how many spells
(or prayers) a character can cast (or pray).  The maximum number of spell
points is derived from your class, level, and intelligence (for spells) or
wisdom (for prayers), and you can never have more spell points than the
maximum.  Spell points may be regained by resting, or by magical means.
Warriors never have any spell points.


=== Races ===

There are twenty-five different races that you can choose from in Steamband.  
Each race has its own adjustments to a character's stats and abilities. 
Most races also have intrinsic abilities.
 
          British
               Hailing from the grand isle of Britain, little can stop 
               their powerful imperialist drive. Stout and afraid of 
               nothing, the British expand throughout the world sharing 
               their superior way of life to those not fortunate enough 
               to be born under the rule of Queen Victoria. They are the 
               standard by which the rest of the world is judged. Growing
               up under the British culture you will find yourself well 
               prepared for whatever endeavours you may perchance to take. 
               Because of their faith in the unsurpassable power 
               of the British Empire and the belief of their culture's 
               supremacy, the British do not know fear.
               Resistant to Fear
               Mus:6 Agi:6 Vig:6 Sch:7 Ego:6 Chr:6

          Asiatic
               Coming from the mystical eastern Asia, these people have 
               grown up in a very different culture from the Western point
               of view. Their emphasis on joint control of body and mind, 
               Ying and Yang, gives them a fantastic discipline. Eastern 
               culture has not given them a very good understanding of 
               science and also their manners might be considered odd by 
               westerners. They are also poor at disarming traps, using 
               devices and digging. Asiatic people have a limited mystical 
               ability to sense their immediate surroundings in dark.
               Infravision 10'
               Mus:6 Agi:8 Vig:6 Sch:5 Ego:7 Chr:5

          American
               Americans came from the young democratic republic of the 
               new continent. Their country is recovering from the 
               devastating civil war and adventurous sprits are high. 
               Americans aren't generally very strong on willpower or 
               mystical aspects, but they are personable and driven 
               in their own way. Americans are poor at disarming 
               traps, saving throws and stealth.
               Mus:7 Agi:7 Vig:7 Sch:7 Ego:4 Chr:8

          African
               Africans, or Negroes as westerners call them, are used 
               to living in very harsh conditions of the darkest Africa. 
               Coming from the uncharted savage areas of the World they 
               are very strong, they have excellent endurance and agility 
               but they lack the knowledge and manners brought by Western 
               education. Africans are poor at disarming traps, 
               using devices and stealth.
               Mus:9 Agi:8 Vig:7 Sch:3 Ego:6 Chr:4

          French
               The French came from the great nation of France. They 
               speak one of the most refined languages, which is used 
               in many high societies in Europe - even in the Russian 
               Tsar's court! They still remember and admire the times 
               of the Louie XIV making them very charming in their 
               behaviour and manners. The French are poor at disarming 
               traps, using devices and stealth.
               Mus:6 Agi:6 Vig:6 Sch:6 Ego:6 Chr:9
          
          Spanish
               The Spanish are the original adventurers and 
               conquistadors. The Spanish heyday is long gone 
               now, but the conqueror spirit lives on. Unlike 
               many other European gentlemen, the Spanish do not 
               neglect their physical exercises, namely agility. 
               The Spanish are poor at disarming traps, 
               using devices, digging and stealth.
               Mus:6 Agi:9 Vig:6 Sch:6 Ego:6 Chr:6
               
          German
               The Germans are known for their industrious sprit and 
               excellent knowledge of machinery and engineering. 
               Laborious nature and the Prussian sense of physical 
               disciplines gives them some physical strength. The 
               Germans are also very self-knowledgeable and strong 
               on will, which gives them an edge with mystical aspects. 
               The Germans are poor at disarming 
               traps, stealth and digging.
               Mus:8 Agi:6 Vig:6 Sch:8 Ego:8 Chr:6
               
          Russian
               The vast Russian empire is perhaps the strongest 
               European power reaching from the Baltic and Barents Sea 
               to the Pacific Ocean and having twice the population of 
               any other European power. Living under the Tsar's absolute 
               rule, hot summers and cold winters is not easy, but the 
               Russians are used to it giving them good physical health. 
               Most of the Russian population, who unlike most other 
               Europeans follow the teachings of the Orthodox Church, are 
               illiterate peasants. The Russians are poor at using 
               devices, searching and digging.
               Mus:6 Agi:6 Vig:9 Sch:6 Ego:6 Chr:6
               
          Scandinavians
               Scandinavians are hardy men from the North. They are 
               still very much in touch with the nature and its spirits 
               - civilized people could even consider them as a sort 
               of pagans even though they namely are Christians. This 
               gives the Scandinavians better magical abilities, but 
               makes them a bit less charming and presentable. The 
               Scandinavians are poor at all skills.
               Mus:6 Agi:6 Vig:6 Sch:6 Ego:8 Chr:5
               
          Arabic
               The Arabs are the noble men of Northern Africa and 
               Middle East. Their old Arabic civilization carried on 
               the knowledge and heritage of the Ancient Greek and 
               Rome when Europe fell to the dark Middle Ages. Their 
               mystical culture gives them better understanding of 
               magic and living in dry desert areas of the world 
               gives them Slow Digestion and some agility. The 
               Arabic people are poor at the rest of the skills.
               Slow Digestion
               Mus:6 Agi:7 Vig:6 Sch:6 Ego:8 Chr:7
               
          Dwarf
               Dwarves, industrious folks of the underground, are 
               rarely seen by ordinary people. Living underground 
               and mining huge and sophisticated tunnel networks 
               (some scientists say that the Earth is actually 
               hollow) make them very strong and healthy. 
               Their scientific achievements are much more advanced 
               than those of humans. Their short growth makes them 
               less agile and not so pleasant to look at. They are 
               also resistant to poisons. Dwarves are good at disarming 
               traps and of course digging. But they are poor at the rest.
               Resist poison
               Mus:10 Agi:4 Vig:10 Sch:9 Ego:3 Chr:2
               
          Brownie
               Brownies, industrious folks of surface, are very rarely 
               seen by ordinary people. They are small on size and 
               their bodies are fragile. When people fall asleep, 
               brownies perform their labour for them but they also 
               torment the lazy. They are extremely good at science 
               and machinery even much more so than their underground 
               counterparts, the Dwarves. Their small and fragile frame 
               makes them physically less able. Brownies 
               cannot be paralysed. They are good at using devices and 
               saving throw. They are poor at the rest.
               Free action
               Mus:5 Agi:5 Vig:4 Sch:12 Ego:5 Chr:5
               
          Daoine Sidhe
               Daoine Sidhe are the divine folks living in hollow mounds 
               in Ireland. They are the faerie kings and queens. They 
               sometimes came out from their mounds to hunt and steal 
               children from humans. They are superior to humans in 
               almost all aspects and they are quite fond of fighting 
               and competitions. Daoine Sidhe have resist light and 
               they see invisible beings. Daoine Sidhe are good at 
               saving throw and stealth. They are poor at the rest.
               Resist Light, See Invis
               Mus:7 Agi:10 Vig:8 Sch:9 Ego:5 Chr:10
               
          Seelie Fae
               Seelie Fae, or properly called Seelie Court, are the 
               benevolent faeries of the British Islands. There are 
               many different kinds of these friendly natured faeries 
               but they commonly are pleasant to look but they are 
               fragile in nature and thus not very strong. They are 
               very agile and have good knowledge of both science and 
               magic. They all have resist light and their magical 
               abilities allow them to float preventing them from 
               falling. Their experience cannot be drained. Seelie 
               Fae are good at saving throw and stealth. They can 
               also learn the skill Fae Pathways, which allows them 
               to teleport short distances.
               Resist lite, Hold life, Feather fall.
               Mus:4 Agi:12 Vig:2 Sch:8 Ego:8 Chr:12
               
          Unseelie Fae
               Unseelie Fae, or Unseelie Court, are the evil and 
               malevolent faeries of the British Isles. They take 
               pleasure in stealing from and tormenting people. 
               They are not very bright, and if you realize that 
               such fairy is tormenting you, you can usually 
               fairly easily out-think it. They are generally 
               best at physical efforts being even stronger than 
               dwarves. They can see invisible beings, they resist 
               darkness and nether and their magical abilities allow 
               them to float preventing them from falling. 
               They also gain strange mutations during time. Unseelie 
               Fae are good at saving throw and stealth. Like Seelie 
               Fae, they can also learn the skill Fae Pathways, which 
               allows them to teleport short distances.
               See invis, Res dark, res nethr, feather, mutable
               Mus:12 Agi:8 Vig:12 Sch:2 Ego:4 Chr:8
               
          Automata
               Automata are mechanical men. They do not evolve 
               or develop in the same sense as living things, 
               but their fine constructed bodies give them 
               endurance and strength over that of humans. 
               They can also use different mechanical body 
               parts giving them new characteristics. Their 
               statistics cannot be reduced, their experience 
               cannot be drained (much) and they cannot be 
               poisoned. Automata themselves are poor at all 
               skills, but they can have some skills depending 
               of their designed use (i.e. class). They start 
               with skill Utility Cypher, which allows them to 
               detect things, and eventuallyidentify objects, 
               and can get Systems Cypher later. 
               Sustain all, Hold life, automata, resist poison
               resist blindness
               Mus:45 Agi:30 Vig:60 Sch:30 Ego:10 Chr:20
               (NOTE: this is actually not applicable because 
               there is no way for automata to 'raise' their stats 
               beyond wielding equipment. Also note that there will 
               soon be other 'upgrade' options for automata - they 
               will have a slightly modified way of gaining stats)
               
          Steam-Mecha
               Steam mecha are great and powerful war machines. 
               They are bigger, harder and meaner than automata 
               making them truly horrible fighting monstrosities. 
               These steam-powered machines are very, very difficult 
               not to notice as they hum, clack, rattle and blow 
               steam as they make their way through the dungeon. 
               This noise will alarm any monster from a distance. 
               They can use mechanical body parts just as automata 
               and their statistics cannot be reduced, their 
               experience cannot be drained and they cannot be 
               poisoned. Steam mecha are good at digging, but 
               they are poor at all other skills. They start with 
               Onslaught Cypher skill, which enhances their 
               weaponary and get Aegis Cypher and Systems 
               Cypher later.
               Sustain all, Hold life, automata, resist poison, Aggravation
               resist blindness
               Mus:65 Agi:45 Vig:70 Sch:30 Ego:10 Chr:10
               (See above)
               
          Djinn
               Djinns are Arabic spirits that may or may not 
               serve Allah. They may be good or evil but they 
               all enjoy punishing people who have mistreated 
               them. They are composed of the elements and can 
               assume human form. They are strongest in magical 
               aspects and science, but are also superior to 
               humans in physical attributes. Djinns resist fire, 
               their ego can't be drained and their magical abilities 
               allow them to float preventing them from falling. 
               Djinns are good at saving throw and poor at digging.
               Sustain ego, Resist fire, Feather Fall
               Mus:8 Agi:10 Vig:8 Sch:10 Ego:12 Chr:8
               
          Rakshasa
               Rakshasa are the ancient sprits of India. They 
               are malevolent evil spirits who eat human flesh. 
               They can posses the bodies of some poor humans 
               to enter physical world. In this form they are 
               much stronger and agile than ordinary humans 
               although their hands are mirrored from human 
               point of view, their thumbs being inside when 
               their palms are up. They are also very beautiful 
               and have some knowledge in science. They have 
               their agility sustained, they resist chaos and 
               nexus. The Rakshasa may gain strange mutations. 
               The Rakshasa are good at using devices, saving 
               throw and stealth. They are poor at disarming 
               traps. They start with Demon Attune, which allows 
               them to mystify and charm opponents and they also 
               get Dark Charm early on.
               sustain agi, resist chaos, nexus, mutable
               Mus:10 Agi:12 Vig:8 Sch:8 Ego:6 Chr:12
               
          Giant
               Giants are huge, stupid and ugly humanoids. They are 
               said to be the builders of many ancient rock formations 
               and stone-age stone rings. Roaming the impenetrable 
               forests and wildernesses, these creatures rely on their 
               size and strength but they are somewhat clumsy and quite 
               stupid. Giants are experts in throwing rocks. Giants are 
               good at digging and poor at all the rest skills. They 
               gain access to the Power attack skill from the start.
               Mus:15 Agi:4 Vig:12 Sch:3 Ego:4 Chr:2
               
          Ogre
               Ogres are like giant's smaller brothers. They stand 
               twice as tall as humans and are built very strong and 
               heavy. They are not as strong as giants but they are 
               neither quite as clumsy, stupid and ugly. Ogres are 
               poor at all the other skills than digging. They also 
               gain access to the power strike skill.
               Mus:13 Agi:6 Vig:10 Sch:4 Ego:4 Chr:4
               
          Troll
               Trolls are evil, ugly and hairy humanoids living in 
               dark forests and caves. They roam the wilderness 
               assembling their armies and waiting for the time to 
               wipe the Christianity from the face of the earth. 
               They are smaller than ogres but they are very healthy 
               and durable and they are able to regenerate 
               wounds. Trolls are not particularly smart. They are 
               poor at all skills.
               regenerate
               Mus:10 Agi:6 Vig:15 Sch:4 Ego:5 Chr:3
               
          Ghost
               Ghosts are the spirits of dead people, who are not 
               yet ready to leave this world. They don't have bodies, 
               making them able to pass through walls, though 
               it hurts them. Other benefits of sprit form are 
               resistance to cold, dark and nether. Ghosts also 
               float through air making them unable to fall and they 
               are telepathic being able to sense other intelligent 
               beings nearby. The draw side of sprit form is that 
               their ability to operate physically is limited. 
               Ghosts are very agile and very good at magic. 
               They are good at stealth but poor at disarming 
               traps and using devices.
               resist cold, dark, nether, Feather Fall, telepathy, wraithform
               Mus:4 Agi:13 Vig:4 Sch:8 Ego:13 Chr:8
               
          Goblin
               Goblins are small little beings, something like a 
               miniature troll. They live around humans though hidden 
               from their eyes and do all kinds of small nuisances 
               like abruptly moving furniture or souring milk. 
               They are very weak in all aspects, including skills.
               Mus:2 Agi:2 Vig:2 Sch:2 Ego:2 Chr:2
               
          Old Ones
               Old Ones are hideous beings out of our universe. 
               They represent the chaos and disorder that do not 
               belong to this universe thus being inconceivable 
               for most humans. Their presence is so disrupting 
               to reality that they are always sensed by others. 
               They are superior to any other being from our 
               universe in all aspects. They also have all stats 
               sustained; they are immunity to acid, fire and cold. 
               They do not know fear, regenerate and are 
               telepathic. They drain the strength of others and 
               their experience is constantly drained as their form 
               shifts. Their presence in this universe 
               causes strange mutations to their physical form.
               sust all, im acid, fire, cold, aggravating, 
               hold life, regen, telepathy, resist 
               fear, drain xp, mutable
               Mus:15 Agi:15 Vig:15 Sch:15 Ego:15 Chr:15
                              
          
=== Classes ===
 
 
          Once a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class.  Some
          classes   will  not  be  available  because  they  have yet to be 
          completed.     For      the      first      few        adventures
          it  is  suggested that you run a warrior or rogue.  Spell casting
          generally requires a more experienced  player  that  is  familiar
          with survival techniques.
 

          Officer
               There are many opportunities for valour - one of the 
               quickest in the fast paced mobile world of the 19th century 
               was to enlist in the armed forces of your homeland. In addition 
               to a broad background in various fighting techniques and 
               hours of practice on the firing range, Officers learn the 
               ability of command and leadership. These skills allow them 
               to strike fear into the hearts of their enemies, drive their 
               ranks into confusion, and even dominate them into following 
               orders. Officers have very good physical attributes and 
               uniform makes them look good as well. Senior officers are 
               known to be fearless.
               Quote: "Those nasty savages wonât pass me, my dear Lady. 
               Put your mind at rest."
               resist fear @ 30th level
               Mus:12 Agi:10 Vig:10 Sch:4 Ego:4 Chr:10

          Aesthete
               Aesthetes are upper class connoisseurs of art who have 
               great eye for beauty and for, well, aesthetics. They are 
               masters in getting their money's worth since they know the 
               value of things. They are not physically very strong, but 
               they have had a profound education in science. Their eye 
               for beauty also applies to their clothing making them very 
               nice to look at.
               Quote: "Beautiful, my darling! Absolutely beautiful! I hope you 
               didn't pay too much for it."
               Mus:4 Agi:8 Vig:6 Sch:10 Ego:8 Chr:12
               
          Detective
               Detectives are masters of logical thinking and piecing 
               separate observations together. They can find and analyse 
               clues with great accuracy. Every good detective has a 
               "Detective's Kit" which helps them to perform their 
               investigations. They are quite swift but not otherwise 
               physically impressive. Their education in science and 
               engineering is profound. They are also very self-conscious 
               and usually very good in manners.
               Quote: "Well, if you noticed, the butler had some dust from 
               red gravel on his leg. It means that he actually did it OR 
               the one who did it wore those pants!"
               Mus:6 Agi:10 Vig:4 Sch:12 Ego:10 Chr:10

          Engineer
               Engineers are the hardy workers and experts in applied science. 
               They are at home with different devices and can activate them 
               for different effects. Their strength lies in these devices and 
               their use and they should avoid hand-to-hand combat.
               They have gone through long schooling making them experts with 
               science and they have quite good willpower as well. Engineers 
               in general are not viewed as very attractive.
               Quote: "Give me the monkey-wrench there. No, you idiot! 
               That's a set wrench!"
               Mus:8 Agi:8 Vig:8 Sch:12 Ego:10 Chr:4

          Explorer
               Explorers are the trailblazers of the unknown corners of the 
               world. With their wits and physical abilities they can get away 
               from any number of tight spots unharmed. They are the jacks-of-
               all-trades being adequate at general powers.
               Explorers are physically very able and not too bad in other 
               qualities either.
               Quote: "Aaargh! Stop that arguing! I will go first, you cowards! 
               Give me my sabre and that torch."
               Mus:12 Agi:10 Vig:8 Sch:6 Ego:10 Chr:8

          Medium
               Medium acts as a middleman between spiritual and our world. 
               Some of the so-called mediums are just swindlers who are after 
               your money, but there are some real ones, who can really connect 
               with the other world. They are very good in utilizing their 
               mental powers and exploiting the spiritual world.
               Mediums are not good in physical attributes, but they are very 
               strong in mental area.
               Quote: "I'm getting something here! I'm getting something here!"
               Mus:6 Agi:6 Vig:6 Sch:10 Ego:12 Chr:10

          Reckoner
               Reckoners are twisted scientists or engineers, who are specialized 
               in distorting reality to suit their own ends, whatever they might 
               be, with punch card operated analytical machines and other 
               interesting gadgets. They are in modern terms "reality programmers" 
               who use their knowledge of science, different kind of strange 
               devices and power of the Ether to change the reality to support 
               their needs, weather it is to open a gateway to another dimension 
               or to invoke death and destruction, intentionally or not.
               Reconers have good agility, but are not otherwise impressive 
               physically. Their knowledge in science is phenomenal. Their 
               experiments may cause them to gain strange mutations.
               Quote: "Trust me, I know what I am doing."
               Mus:4 Agi:10 Vig:6 Sch:12 Ego:8 Chr:4

          Tourist
               Tourists are good in travelling and finding their way from 
               place A to place B. They also want to do this travelling 
               in a safe manner. Tourists are quite poor in all characteristics.
               Quote: "Now, Let me see the map, According to this map and 
               my orienteering, we are on top of that hill over there."
               Mus:4 Agi:4 Vig:4 Sch:4 Ego:4 Chr:4

          Sportsman
               Sportsman is a manifestation of the Great White Hunter. 
               They are always going for the big game, whether it is a 
               rhino in Africa or a tiger in Asia. They are masters with 
               guns and have good physical attributes too. Even though 
               they could survive a tough melee combat; their best asset 
               is shooting. Their tactic is shoot first or become 
               eaten.
               Quote: "Luck didn't have anything to do with it. I've made harder 
               shots from greater distance back in Africa."
               Mus:10 Agi:14 Vig:10 Sch:6 Ego:8 Chr:10

          Adventurer
               Adventurers are in it for the thrill. They are not necessarily 
               after money, but it of course helps. Adventurers are the 
               all-around fighter type. Their physical attributes are better 
               than mental ones and they are certainly not the type which 
               stays indoors at school studying. Their hand-to-hand fighting 
               skills are better than any other class.
               Quote: "Of course I'm in!"
               Mus:14 Agi:12 Vig:10 Sch:4 Ego:8 Chr:8
               
          Anarchist
               Anarchists are an underground force in Europe. They rebel 
               against the ruling authorities setting up bombs and making 
               all kind of conspiracies. Although they strive for a regime 
               change according to the teachings of Karl Marx, they are not 
               true communists, since they have no respect for authorities 
               what so ever. They are somewhat strong and have some strange 
               affinity with magical world. They are the masters of chaos, 
               which causes them to mutate strangely.
               Quote: "Oh, they'll remember the Red Front of London Underground 
               after this baby goes off. Oh they sure will know us!"
               Mus:10 Agi:8 Vig:4 Sch:8 Ego:12 Chr:12
               
          Dashing Hussar
               Hussars are the noble warriors of Poland. Many poor noble 
               men made an astonishing career as these flamboyant warriors. 
               They saved the city of Vienna, and thus the whole Austria - 
               from the Turkish siege in 1683. Their fighting tradition 
               goes back to the Middle Ages so they have had plenty of 
               time to master hand-to-hand combat. They continue to be a 
               fearsome opponent even at the time of firearms.
               They are unparalleled fighters, they have excellent 
               physical attributes and their noble upbringing gives them 
               good education.
               DASHING HUSSAR CLASS POWERS NOT FUNCTIONING.
               Quote: "Hah! Those are not a match even for pesky Turkish 
               bashi-bazouks! Charge!"
               Mus:14 Agi:12 Vig:14 Sch:10 Ego:10 Chr:10
               
          Gentleman/Lady
               Gentlemen are a product of their time. They are good at 
               nothing, even in keeping their money, since they have a 
               tendency to lead an extravagant live they cannot afford. 
               They have neglected their physical exercises and are not 
               particularly well educated in science either. They are 
               the real challenge to play.
               Quote: "Now listen to me, my dear fellow. I'm most 
               certainly not going to degrade myself to doing that 
               bloody thing!"
               Mus:2 Agi:4 Vig:4 Sch:10 Ego:8 Chr:10
               
          Rogue
               Rogues are professional thieves and cutpurses. They range 
               from a filthy street urchin to a sophisticated gentleman 
               burglar like Arsene Lupin. They all have common that they 
               are very agile and stealthy and they can use some 
               devices to aid them in their unsavoury endeavours.
               Quote: "Dear sir, if you are going to stay this dagger away 
               from your precious intestines, you give me your money. 
               And that pocket watch."
               Mus:6 Agi:12 Vig:8 Sch:10 Ego:8 Chr:10
               
          Steam Engineer
               Steam engineers differ from ãplainä engineers by being very 
               sophisticated in the use of the new power, steam. Whereas 
               normal engineers build bridges and use little gadgets to all 
               kinds of things, steam engineers build huge steam-operated 
               machines. Although they can use the same devices as 
               engineers, they tend to be more aggressive in nature than 
               old-school engineers. Steam engineers are a bit more physically 
               fit and better educated than their layman counterparts.
               Quote: "Steam! Now that is the power source of the future! Steam!"
               Mus:8 Agi:9 Vig:10 Sch:14 Ego:6 Chr:4
               
          Naturalist
               The modern view of man as a master over nature has some 
               opponents. These naturalists claim that humans are dependant 
               on nature and they want to preserve the nature from being 
               destroyed and polluted by modern machinery and advances. 
               They are very tuned-in with the nature. Due to their 
               well-planned diet they are healthy, tough not otherwise 
               physically fit. Their best strengths lie in their knowledge 
               of mystical aspects of nature.
               Quote: "Mmmm, This tree is very nice to hug"
               Mus:4 Agi:6 Vig:10 Sch:10 Ego:12 Chr:8
               
          Qabalist
               Qabalist are the Jewish mystics. They use magical ancient 
               scripts and mystical secret knowledge dated beyond the 
               times of King Solomon. Qabalist are fragile, but rather 
               nimble and powerful magically.
               Quote: "Kaspar, Kelei, Emar or Bleiteisar, the master and 
               I adjure you with a second adjuratioin, that you tell me 
               that thing or who has committed that theft."
               QABALIST'S CLASS POWERS NOT FUNCTIONING.
               Mus:3 Agi:10 Vig:4 Sch:10 Ego:14 Chr:6
               
          Oculus Dei
               Oculus Dei, "Eye of God" as a direct translation, are 
               fervent Christian believers who follow God and put their 
               faith in him when the tight spot comes. They have many 
               mystical beliefs and they can use religious books to 
               get help from angels and holy spirits. They can use 
               other books too, but not nearly as well.
               They are not physically impressive, but they have good 
               education and their faith gives them spiritual power.
               Quote: "Michael, Midiel and Muriel, Chief and Captains of 
               the Celestial Army be a defence and protection about us, 
               allow no adverse forces to interfere with our work."
               Mus:5 Agi:6 Vig:8 Sch:10 Ego:13 Chr:6
               
          Ninja
               Ninjas are the secret assassins from the Orient. 
               Coming mainly from Japan, these agile assassins are 
               the masters of conjuring tricks, stealth and 
               hiding. They are also good in combat, but do not 
               match some other warriors in open duel.
               NOT FUNCTIONING
               NINJA'S CLASS POWERS NOT COMPLETE
               Mus:11 Agi:11 Vig:11 Sch:6 Ego:6 Chr:6
               
          Weapon Master
               NOT FUNCTIONING
               Mus:14 Agi:12 Vig:10 Sch:4 Ego:6 Chr:6
 

=== Stats ===

          Muscle
               Muscle is important in fighting with weapons and in melee
               combat.  A high muscle can improve your chances of hitting
               as well as the amount of damage done with each hit.  Char-
               acters with low muscle may receive penalties.  Muscle
               is also useful in tunnelling and in carrying heavy items.
 
          Schooling
               Schooling affects the spellcasting abilities of mage-like
               spellcasters.  Schooling will affect the number of spells 
               you may learn each level as well as the number of spell 
               points you receive.  A high schooling may also improve 
               your chances of successfully casting a spell. A good 
               schooling can also help with using magic devices, picking 
               locks, and disarming traps.
 
          Ego
               The primary function of Ego is to determine the force
               of will.  Again, high Ego will increase the number of 
               spell points you have.  A good Ego can also
               help to improve your chances of resisting magical spells cast
               upon you by monsters.
 
          Agility
               Agility is a combination of dexterity and quickness.  A high
               Agility may allow a character to get multiple blows with
               lighter weapons, thus greatly increasing his kill power, and
               will increase his chances of hitting with any weapon and
               dodging blows from enemies.  Agility is also useful in
               picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting yourself from
               some of the thieves that inhabit the dungeons. Indeed, if 
               the character has a high enough Agility, thieves will
               never be successful in stealing from the player.
 
          Vigor
               Vigor is a character's ability to resist damage to his
               body, and to recover from damage received.  Therefore a
               character with a high Vigor will receive more hit
               points and also recover them faster while resting.
 
          Charm
               Charm represents a character's personality and physical
               appearance.  A character with a high Charm will receive
               better prices from store owners, whereas a character with a
               very low Charm may be robbed blind. 
 

=== Abilities (outdated) ===

          Characters possess some different abilities which can  help  them
          to survive.  The starting abilities of a character are based upon
          race and class.  Abilities may be adjusted by high or low  stats,
          and may increase with the level of the character.
 
          Fighting
               Fighting is the ability to hit and do damage with weapons or
               fists.  Normally  a  character  gets  a single blow from any
               weapon, but if his dexterity and strength are  high  enough,
               he  may  receive  more blows per round with lighter weapons.
               Strength and dexterity both modify the  ability  to  hit  an
               opponent.  This skill increases  with the level of the char-
               acter.
 
          Shooting Ability
               Using  ranged  missile  weapons  (and  throwing  objects) is
               included  in this skill.  Different stats apply to different
               weapons, but this ability may modify the distance an  object
               is  thrown/fired, the amount of damage done, and the ability
               to hit a creature.  This skill increases with the  level  of
               the character.
 
          Saving Throws
               A Saving Throw is the ability of a character to  resist  the
               effects  of  a spell cast on him by another person/creature.
               This does not include spells cast on the player by  his  own
               stupidity,  such  as  quaffing a nasty potion.  This ability
               increases with the level of the  character,  but  then  most
               high  level  creatures  are  better at casting spells, so it
               tends to even out.  A high wisdom also increases this  abil-
               ity.
 
          Stealth
               The ability to move  silently about is very useful.  Charac-
               ters with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents,
               gaining the first blow.  Also, creatures may fail to  notice
               a  stealthy  character  entirely, allowing a player to avoid
               certain fights.  This skill is based entirely upon race  and
               class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.
 
          Disarming
               Disarming is the  ability  to  remove  traps  (safely),  and
               includes  picking  locks  on  traps and doors.  A successful
               disarming will gain the character  some experience.  A  trap
               must  be  found  before  it  can be disarmed.  Dexterity and
               intelligence both modify the ability  to  disarm,  and  this
               ability increases with the level of the character.
 
          Magical Devices
               Using a magical device such as  a  wand  or  staff  requires
               experience  and  knowledge.  Spell  users such as  magi  and
               priests are therefore much better at using a magical  device
               than say a warrior.  This skill is modified by intelligence,
               and increases with the level of the character.

          Searching Ability (Searching)
               To search is to actively look for secret doors, floor traps,
               and  traps on chests.  Rogues are the best at searching, but
               magi,  rangers, and priests are also good at it.  This skill
               is  based  entirely  upon  race  and  class,  and will never
               improve unless magically enhanced.



=== Combinations of Race and Class (not enforced) ===



=== Miscellaneous (outdated) ===


          Infra-vision
               Infra-vision is the ability to see heat sources. Since  most
               of the dungeon is cool or cold, infra-vision will not allow
               the player to see walls and objects.  Infra-vision will allow
               a  character  to see any warm-blooded creatures up to a cer-
               tain distance.  This ability works equally well with or with
               out a light source.  However, many of Steamband's creatures are
               cold-blooded, and will not be detected unless lit  up  by  a
               light  source.  All non human races have innate  infra-vision
               ability.  Humans can gain infra-vision only if it is magically
               enhanced.
 
 
=== Stat Bonus Tables (outdated) ===

Stat, hit dice, and experience points per level modifications due to race
are listed in the following table.

=== Ability Tables (outdated) ===

