=== Creating a Character ===

Angband is a roleplaying game, in which you, the player, control a character
in the world of Angband. Perhaps the most important thing you control is the
birth of your character, in which you choose or allow to be chosen various
attributes that will affect the future life of your character.

Character creation, or birth, is controlled through a variety of choices
as to constraints on the type of character you wish to play, followed by
a series of random calculations to generate ("roll up") a random character
matching the appropriate constraints.

Once your character has been generated, you will be given the choice to
generate a new character obeying the same constraints, and once you have
generated more than one character, you can switch back and forth between
the two most recent characters, until you are presented with a personality
that you feel comfortable with.

You may start the entire process over at any time.

Once you have accepted a character you will asked to provide a name for the
character. In general, the actual choice of a name is not important, but do
keep in mind that it may have some effect on the game itself. For example,
on some machines, the chatacter name determines the filename that will be
used to save the character to disk. On others, the character name specifies
special "pref" files. And the character name is used on the high score list.


=== Character Characteristics ===

Each character has three primary attributes, sex, race, and class, that
are chosen before the character is generated, and which will stay fixed
for the entire life of that character. These attributes have many effects,
which will be mentioned as they come up.

Each character has a few secondary attributes, height, weight, social class,
and background history, which are randomly determined, but which are affected
by the sex and race of the character. In general, these attributes are only
used to provide "flavor" to the character, to assist in the roll playing, but
they do have a few minor effects on the game. For example, background history
affects social class, which affects the amount of money the character will
start with.

Each character also has six primary "stats", strength, intelligence, wisdom,
dexterity, constitution, and charisma, which modify the abilities of the
character in a variety of ways. Every stat has a numerical value, ranging
from a minimum of 3, up to a normal maximum of 18, and even higher, into
the "percentile" range, represented as "18/01" through "18/100". Actually,
every stat can be raised even above 18/100 by magical means, up to a pure
maximum of 18/220, which is represented as "18/***". Traditionally, a
percentile stat such as "18/50" has been though of as representing a value
part way between 18 and 19, and this is one way to think of them. However,
often, the best way to view the "bonus" values after the "18/" is as "tenth"
points, since it often takes the same magic to raise a stat from, say, 4 to 5,
or 16 to 17, as it does from, say, 18/40 to 18/50. The important thing to
remember is that almost all internal calculations "ignore" the final digit
of any "bonus", so that, for example, "18/40" and "18/49" are always have
the same effects. During character generation, each stat is rolled out as
a number from 8 to 17, with a normal distribution, and is then immediately
modified based on the race and class of the character.

Each character also has several primary "skills", disarming, magic devices,
saving throws, stealth, searching ability, searching frequency, fighting skill,
and shooting skill, which are derived from the character's race, class, level,
stats, and current equipment. These skills have rather obvious effects, but
will be described more completely below.

Each character may have one or more "racially intrinsic skills", based on
the race of the character. These may include special resistances, or even
abilities such as infravision.

Each character has experience, which increases as the character becomes more
experienced, and a level, which is based on experience, and also on race and
class. As the experience rises, so does the level, and as the level rises,
certain other abilities and characteristics rise as well. Deep down inside,
the real objective of the game is to increase your experience, and certain
other characteristics, and also to collect useful items, to give you a decent
chance against Morgoth. Certain monsters can "drain" your experience, and
thus your level, which will cause you to lose all of the effects of the higher
level. Luckily, you can restore drained experience through magical means, or
by simply regaining the experience all over again.

Each character has some gold, which can be used to buy items from the shops
in the town, and which can be obtained not only from selling items to the
shops, but also by taking it from dead monsters and by finding it hidden in
the dungeon. Each character starts out with some gold, the amount of which
is based on the characters social class (higher is better), charisma (higher
is better), sex (female characters start with more gold), and other stats
(less powerful characters start with more gold). Each character also starts
out with a few useful items, which may be kept, or sold to a shop-keeper for
more gold.

Each character has an armor class, representing how well the character can
avoid damage. The armor class is affected by dexterity and the equipment.

Each character has hit points, representing how much damage the character can
sustain before he dies. The maximum number of hit points is derived from your
race, class, level, and constitution, and you can never have more hit points
than the maximum. Hit points may be regained by resting, or by a variety of
magical means.

Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how many spells
(or prayers) a character can cast (or pray). The maximum number of spell
points is derived from your class, level, and intelligence (for spells) or
wisdom (for prayers), and you can never have more spell points than the
maximum. Spell points may be regained by resting, or by magical means.


=== Races ===

There are ten different races that you can choose from in Angband. Some
races are restricted as to what profession they may be, and each race has
its own adjustments to a character's stats and abilities. Most races also
have intrinsic abilities.
 
     Human
        The human is the base character. All other races are com-
        pared to them. Humans can choose any class and are average
        at everything. Humans tend to go up levels faster than any
        other race because of their shorter life spans. No racial
        adjustments or intrinsics occur to characters choosing human.
 
     Half-Elf
        Half-elves tend to be smarter and faster than a human, but
        not as strong. Half-elves are slightly better at searching,
        disarming, saving throws, stealth, bows, and magic, but they
        are not as good at hand weapons. Half-elves may choose any
        class and do not receive any intrinsic abilities.
 
     Elf
        Elves are better magicians then humans, but not as good at
        fighting. They tend to be smarter and faster than either
        humans or half-elves and also have better wisdom. Elves
        are better at searching, disarming, perception, stealth, bows,
        and magic, but they are not as good at hand weapons. Elves
        may choose any class except Paladin. They resist light
        effects intrinsically.
 
     Hobbits
        Hobbits, or Halflings, are very good at bows, throwing, and
        have good saving throws. They also are very good at search-
        ing, disarming, perception, and stealth; so they make excel-
        lent rogues, but prefer to be called burglars. They will be
        much weaker than humans, and no good at melee fighting.
        Halflings have fair infravision, so they can detect warm
        creatures at a distance. Hobbits can choose between being a
        warrior, mage, or rogue. They have their dexterity sustained.
 
     Gnome
        Gnomes are smaller than dwarves but larger than halflings.
        They, like the halflings, live in the earth in burrow-like
        homes. Gnomes make excellent mages, and have very good saving
        throws. They are good at searching, disarming, perception,
        and stealth. They have lower strength than humans so they
        are not very good at fighting with hand weapons. Gnomes have
        fair infra-vision, so they can detect warm-blooded creatures
        at a distance. A gnome may choose between being a warrior,
        mage, priest, or rogue. Gnomes are intrinsically protected
        against paralysis and some slowing effects.
 
     Dwarf
        Dwarves are the headstrong miners and fighters of legend.
        Since dungeons are the natural home of a dwarf, they are
        excellent choices for a warrior or priest. Dwarves tend to
        be stronger and tougher but slower and less intelligent than
        humans. Because they are so headstrong and are somewhat wise,
        they resist spells which are cast on them. Dwarves also have
        very good infra-vision because they live underground. They
        do have one big drawback, though. Dwarves are loudmouthed and
        proud, singing in loud voices, arguing with themselves for no
        good reason, screaming out challenges at imagined foes. In
        other words, dwarves have a miserable stealth. They can never
        be blinded. 
 
     Half-Orc
        Half-Orcs make excellent warriors and decent priests, but
        are terrible at magic. They are as bad as dwarves at stealth,
        and horrible at searching, disarming, and perception.
        Half-Orcs are, let's face it, ugly. They tend to pay more for
        goods in town. Half-Orcs do make good warriors and rogues,
        for the simple reason that Half-Orcs tend to have great
        constitutions and lots of hit points. Because of their
        preference to living underground to on the surface, half-orcs
        resist darkness attacks.
 
     Half-Troll
        Half-Trolls are incredibly strong, and have more hit points
        than any other character race. They are also very stupid and
        slow. They will make great warriors and iffy priests. They
        are bad at searching, disarming, perception, and stealth.
        They are so ugly that a Half-Orc grimaces in their presence.
        They also happen to be fun to run... Half-trolls always have
        their strength sustained.
 
     Dunadan
        Dunedain are a race of hardy men from the West. This elder
        race surpasses human abilities in every field, especially
        constitution. However, being men of the world, very little is
        new to them, and levels are very hard to gain... They can
        play all classes. Their constitution cannot be reduced.
 
     High-Elf
        High-elves are a race of immortal beings dating from the
        beginning of time. Levels are even harder for them to gain 
        than to Dunedain. They are masters of all skills, and are
        strong and intelligent, although their wisdom is sometimes
        suspect. They can play all classes except Paladin, and very
        well at that. High-elves begin their lives able to see the
        unseen, and resist light effects just like regular elves.
 
 
=== Classes ===
 
Once a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class. Some
classes will not be available to certain races, for instance, a
Half-Troll cannot become a Paladin. For the first few adventures
it is suggested that you run a warrior or rogue. Spellcasting
generally requires a more experienced player that is familiar with
survival techniques.
 
     Warrior
        A Warrior is a hack-and-slash character, who solves most of
        his problems by cutting them to pieces, but will occasion-
        ally fall back on the help of a magical device. His prime
        stats are Strength and Constitution, and a good Dexterity
        can really help at times. A Warrior will be good at Fight-
        ing and Throwing/Bows, but bad at most other skills.
 
     Mage
        A Mage must live by his wits. He cannot hope to simply hack
        his way through the dungeon, and so must therefore use his
        magic to defeat, deceive, confuse, and escape. A mage is
        not really complete without an assortment of magical devices
        to use in addition to his spells. He can master the higher
        level magical devices far easier than anyone else, and has
        the best saving throw to resist effects of spells cast at
        him. Intelligence and  Dexterity are his primary stats.
        There is no rule that says a mage cannot become a good
        fighter, but spells are his true realm.
 
     Priest
        A Priest is a character of holy devotion. They explore the
        dungeon only to destroy the evil that lurks within, and if
        treasure just happens to fall into their packs, well, so
        much more to the glory of their church! Priests receive
        their spells from a deity, and therefore do not choose which
        spells they will learn. They are familiar with magical dev-
        ices, preferring to call them instruments of god, but are
        not as good as a mage in their use. Priests have good sav-
        ing throws, and make decent fighters, preferring blunt
        weapons over edged ones. Wisdom and Charisma are the
        priest's primary stats.
 
     Rogue
        A Rogue is a character that prefers to live by his cunning,
        but is capable of fighting his way out of a tight spot. He
        is the master of traps and locks, no device being impossible
        for him to overcome. A rogue has a high stealth allowing
        him to sneak around many creatures without having to fight,
        or sneak up and get the first blow. A rogue's perception is
        higher than any other class, and many times he will notice a
        trap or secret door before having to search. A rogue is
        better than warriors or paladins with magical devices, but
        still can not rely on their performance. Rogues can also
        learn a few spells, but not the powerful offensive spells
        magi can use. A rogue's primary stats are Intelligence and
        Dexterity.
 
     Ranger
        A Ranger is a warrior/mage. He is a good fighter, and the
        best of the classes with a missile weapon such as a bow.
        The ranger learns spells much more slowly than a mage, but
        is capable of learning all but the most powerful spells.
        Because a ranger is really a dual class character, more
        experience is required for him to advance. A ranger has a
        good stealth, good perception, good searching, a good saving
        throw, and is good with magical devices. His primary stats
        are Intelligence and Dexterity.
 
     Paladin
        A Paladin is a warrior/priest. He is a very good fighter,
        second only to the warrior class, but not very good at mis-
        sile weapons. He receives prayers at a slower pace then the
        priest, but can even receive the most powerful prayers.
        Because a paladin is really a dual class character, it
        requires more experience to advance him. A paladin lacks
        much in the way of abilities. He is poor at stealth, per-
        ception, searching, and magical devices. He has a decent
        saving throw due to his divine alliance. His primary stats
        are Strength and Charisma.
 

=== Stats ===

     Strength
        Strength is important in fighting with weapons and in melee
        combat. A high strength can improve your chances of hitting
        as well as the amount of damage done with each hit. Char-
        acters with low strengths may receive penalties. Strength
        is also useful in tunneling and in carrying heavy items.
 
     Intelligence
        Intelligence affects the spellcasting abilities of mage-like
        spellcasters, mages, rangers, and rogues. Intelligence
        will affect the number of spells you may learn each level as
        well as the number of spell points you receive. A high
        intelligence may also improve your chances of successfully
        casting a spell. You cannot learn spells if your intelligence
        is 7 or lower. A good intelligence can also help with using
        magic devices, picking locks, and disarming traps.
 
     Wisdom
        The primary function of wisdom is to determine the ability
        of a priest or paladin to use prayers, just like intelligence
        affects spellcasting. Again, high wisdom will increase the
        number of spell points you have and increase the number of
        prayers you can learn each level, while improving the chance
        that a prayer will be successful. A good wisdom can also
        help to improve your chances of resisting magical spells cast
        upon you by monsters.
 
     Dexterity
        Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness. A high
        dexterity may allow a character to get multiple blows with
        lighter weapons, thus greatly increasing his kill power, and
        will increase his chances of hitting with any weapon and
        dodging blows from enemies. Dexterity is also useful in
        picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting yourself from
        some of the thieves that inhabit the dungeons.
 
     Constitution
        Constitution is a character's ability to resist damage to his
        body, and to recover from damage received. Therefore a
        character with a high constitution will receive more hit
        points and also recover them faster while resting.
 
     Charisma
        Charisma represents a character's personality and physical
        appearance. A character with a high charisma will receive
        better prices from store owners, whereas a character with a
        very low charisma may be robbed blind. A high charisma will
        also mean more starting money for the character.
 

=== Abilities ===

Characters possess some different abilities which can help them
survive. The starting abilities of a character are based upon
race and class. Abilities may be adjusted by high or low stats,
and may increase with the level of the character.
 
     Fighting
        Fighting is the ability to hit and do damage with weapons or
        fists. Normally a character gets a single blow from any
        weapon, but if his dexterity and strength are high enough,
        he may receive more blows per round with lighter weapons.
        Strength and dexterity both modify the ability to hit an
        opponent. This skill increases with the level of the char-
        acter.
 
     Shooting Ability
        Using ranged missile weapons (and throwing objects) is
        included in this skill. Different stats apply to different
        weapons, but this ability may modify the distance an object
        is thrown/fired, the amount of damage done, and the ability
        to hit a creature. This skill increases with the level of
        the character.
 
     Saving Throws
        A Saving Throw is the ability of a character to resist the
        effects of a spell cast on him by another person/creature.
        This does not include spells cast on the player by his own
        stupidity, such as quaffing a nasty potion. This ability
        increases with the level of the character, but then most
        high level creatures are better at casting spells, so it
        tends to even out. A high wisdom also increases this abil-
        ity.
 
     Stealth
        The ability to move silently about is very useful. Charac-
        ters with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents,
        gaining the first blow. Also, creatures may fail to notice
        a stealthy character entirely, allowing a player to avoid
        certain fights. This skill is based entirely upon race and
        class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.
 
     Disarming
        Disarming is the ability to remove traps (safely), and
        includes picking locks on traps and doors. A successful
        disarming will gain the character some experience. A trap
        must be found before it can be disarmed. Dexterity and
        intelligence both modify the ability to disarm, and this
        ability increases with the level of the character.
 
     Magical Devices
        Using a magical device such as a wand or staff requires
        experience and knowledge. Spell users such as magi and
        priests are therefore much better at using a magical device
        than say a warrior. This skill is modified by intelligence,
        and increases with the level of the character.
 
     Searching Frequency (Perception)
        Perception is the ability to notice something without
        actively seeking it out. This skill is based entirely upon
        race and class, and will never improve unless magically
        enhanced.
 
     Searching Ability (Searching)
        To search is to actively look for secret doors, floor traps,
        and traps on chests. Rogues are the best at searching, but
        magi, rangers, and priests are also good at it. This skill
        is based entirely upon race and class, and will never
        improve unless magically enhanced.

     Infra-vision
        Infra-vision is the ability to see heat sources. Since most
        of the dungeon is cool or cold, infra-vision will not allow
        the player to see walls and objects. Infra-vision will allow
        a character to see any warm-blooded creatures up to a cer-
        tain distance. This ability works equally well with or with
        out a light source. The majority of Angband's creatures are
        cold-blooded, and will not be detected unless lit up by a
        light source. All non human races have innate infra-vision
        ability. Human can gain infra-vision only if it is magically
        enhanced.
 
 
=== Maximize Mode ===

At initial character generation, maximize mode makes no difference
for statistics under 18. For scores above 18, each die spot turns into
5 to 20 percentage points when not in maximize mode; in maximize
mode, each spot turns into exactly 10 percentage points. Therefore,
you can achieve higher stats when not in maximize mode. However,
in maximize mode the racial and class stat bonuses/penalties are
applied to your statistical maximums; this enables you to eventually
attain a higher natural set of statistics. In the long run, the game is
easier in maximize mode, but it's much tougher in the beginning.
Characters created in maximize mode get their statistic corrections
applied after the roll. The maximum then is not 18/100 for all stats
but 18/(100 +/- 10*correction). 

All characters receive stat modifiers based on their race and class
(Half-Trolls get an INT penalty, Priests get a WIS bonus, and so forth).
The maximize mode flag determines how these modifiers are applied to
the character's actual stats. Since this obviously affects character
creation, the value of this flag must be chosen before you create your
character. 

As an example of how this works, imagine rolling up a High-Elf Mage.
High-Elf Mages receive a combined racial and class bonus of +6 to INT;
for purposes of illustration, let's say the stat roller rolls a 17 INT (the
highest possible value before modification). 

In non-maximize mode, the +6 bonus is applied much as if the character
quaffed six Potions of Intelligence. The positive side of this is that your
character can get a starting INT of around 18/70, since each "potion" can
give them more than 10 percentiles once they are past 18. The negative
side of this is that this 18/70 is now your character's base INT, and
without stat-boosting items, he/she can only push their base INT up to
18/100. 

In maximize mode, the +6 bonus is applied as though the character had
swallowed a Ring of Intelligence (+6). The negative side of this is that
your character can't get a starting INT above 18/50 (17 plus the +6
"ring" bonus). The positive side of this is that although the effective INT
is 18/50, the base INT is only 17; once you've pushed your character's
base INT up to 18/100, the effective INT without stat-boosting items will
be 18/160! 

On the flip side, our High-Elf Mage also gets a combined -4 penalty to
STR. In non-maximize mode, this is treated like quaffing four Potions of
Weakness, but your character's STR can still be increased all the way up
to 18/100. In maximize mode, you've effectively got a Spleen of
Weakness (-4), which means that your character's maximum possible
effective STR, without stat-boosting items, is 18/60 (18/100 base plus
the -4 penalty). 

In summary, then in non-maximize mode, your character will get bettter
starting stats, and all stats will max out at 18/100. This typically makes
the early game easier, while in maximize mode, your character's starting
stats aren't as good, but the primary stat(s) will max out above 18/100,
while the "off" stats will max out below 18/100. This typically makes the
end game easier. 


=== Preserve Mode ===

Characters created in preserve mode receive no special level feelings,
but any artifacts, if missed, may appear again later in the game and
are not lost forever. Anything that would have caused a special
feeling contributes to the general level feeling that your character
receives instead. 

Non-preserve mode is the opposite of preserve mode. Levels generated
with an artifact on the dungeon floor will receive a "special" feeling,
as will levels with particularly interesting features, such as vaults.
However, unidentified artifacts, if missed, will be lost forever. 


=== The Auto-Roller ===

Once you have chosen your race and class, and whether or not you wish
to use maximize and preserve modes, you will be asked whether or not
you wish to use the auto-roller.

The auto-roller is a quick means of generating start-up characters
based on a set of user-selected criteria. If you choose to use the
auto-roller, you will be presented with a column giving the maximum
possible stats for the race/class and choice of maximize mode. You
will then be prompted to enter the desired stats which should not
exceed the maximum stats displayed on the screen. 

Once you have entered your desired statistics, the computer will
randomly create successive start-up characters and compare them to
your desired statistics until it rolls a character that matches or
exceeds your expectations. The computer will then display the
character for you to look at and also display the character's
life-rating. If you accept the rolled character, you will be asked
for its name and then brought to the town screen. If not, the
computer will resume rolling and searching for the next match. 

HINT: The stats are not independant of each other and trying to
maximize each one using the auto-roller will not work. A good idea
is to specify stats close to maximum that are critical for your
class (for example, high wisdom for priests, intelligence for
mages and strength and dexterity for fighters). You should set
minimum acceptable levels for the remaining stats rather than
looking for high rolls. 

If you select not to use the auto-roller, the computer will roll
one random character at a time and then display it for you to
either accept or reject. 

Generally, you can put two stats close to their maximum on the autoroller
with little trouble. Three is much more difficult (essentially the other
three stats have to be close to their minimum), so you can wait days. If
you want to set minimums on three stats, you should make at least two of
them several points below their maximum (above 18 you should drop by about
20 - or perhaps just a bit less - to count as a point). If it takes more
than a couple of minutes, hit ^C and try again with lower values.

Also, when considering Autorolling, recognize the fact that there are only
certain 'ranges' that make a difference. A starting Intelligence of
18/89 is the same as a starting Intelligence of 18/70 in terms of mana.
Of course, since 18/90 is the next 'step up', you could go for 18/80 and
then try to buy a ring of intelligence (+1). But a starting constitution 
of 9 isn't much different from of 14. So don't waste your autoroller's 
time trying to reach a maximum for a stat that won't make a difference.
This of course depends on your version of Angband. Check the spoiler sheets 
for your version.
