=== Creating a Character ===

GSNband is a roleplaying game, in which you, the player, control a character
in the world of GSNband.  Perhaps the most important thing you control is the
birth of your character, in which you choose or allow to be chosen various
attributes that will affect the future life of your character.

Character creation, or birth, is controlled through a variety of choices
as to constraints on the type of character you wish to play, followed by
a series of random calculations to generate ("roll up") a random character
matching the appropriate constraints.

Once your character has been generated, you will be given the choice to
generate a new character obeying the same constraints, and once you have
generated more than one character, you can switch back and forth between
the two most recent characters, until you are presented with a personality
that you feel comfortable with.

You may start the entire process over at any time.

Once you have accepted a character you will asked to provide a name for the
character.  In general, the actual choice of a name is not important, but do
keep in mind that it may have some effect on the game itself.  For example,
on some machines, the chatacter name determines the filename that will be
used to save the character to disk.  On others, the character name specifies
special "pref" files.  And the character name is used on the high score list.


=== Character Characteristics ===

Each character has three primary attributes, sex, race, and class, that
are chosen before the character is generated, and which will stay fixed
for the entire life of that character.  These attributes have many effects,
which will be mentioned as they come up.  Keep in mind that in the current
version of Angband, your choice of race may restrict your choice of class.

Each character has a few secondary attributes, height, weight, social class,
and background history, which are randomly determined, but which are affected
by the sex and race of the character.  In general, these attributes are only
used to provide "flavor" to the character, to assist in the roll playing, but
they do have a few minor effects on the game.  For example, background history
affects social class, which affects the amount of money the character will
start with.  And weight affects carrying capacity and bashing ability.

Each character also has seven primary "stats", strength, intelligence, wisdom,
dexterity, constitution, charisma and luck, which modify the abilities of the
character in a variety of ways.  Every stat has a numerical value, ranging
from a minimum of 3, up to a normal maximum of 18, and even higher, into
the "percentile" range, represented as "18/01" through "18/100".  Actually,
every stat can be raised even above 18/100 by magical means, up to a pure
maximum of 18/220, which is represented as "18/***".  Traditionally, a
percentile stat such as "18/50" has been though of as representing a value
part way between 18 and 19, and this is one way to think of them.  However,
often, the best way to view the "bonus" values after the "18/" is as "tenth"
points, since it often takes the same magic to raise a stat from, say, 4 to 5,
or 16 to 17, as it does from, say, 18/40 to 18/50.  The important thing to
remember is that almost all internal calculations "ignore" the final digit
of any "bonus", so that, for example, "18/40" and "18/49" are always have
the same effects.  During character generation, each stat is rolled out as
a number from 8 to 17, with a normal distribution, and is then immediately
modified based on the race and class of the character.

Each character also has several primary "skills", disarming, magic devices,
saving throws, stealth, searching ability, searching frequency, fighting skill,
and shooting skill, which are derived from the character's race, class, level,
stats, and current equipment.  These skills have rather obvious effects, but
will be described more completely below.

Each character may have one or more "racially intrinsic skills", based on
the race of the character.  These may include special resistances, or even
abilities such as infravision.

Each character has experience, which increases as the character becomes more
experienced, and a level, which is based on experience, and also on race and
class.  As the experience rises, so does the level, and as the level rises,
certain other abilities and characteristics rise as well.  Deep down inside,
the real objective of the game is to increase your experience, and certain
other characteristics, and also to collect useful items, to give you a decent
chance against Morgoth, Lord of Darkness.  Certain monsters can "drain" your
experience, and thus your level, which will cause you to lose all of the
effects of the higher level.  Luckily, you can restore drained experience
through magical means, or by simply regaining the experience all over again.

Each character has some gold, which can be used to buy items from the shops
in the town, and which can be obtained not only from selling items to the
shops, but also by taking it from dead monsters and by finding it hidden in
the dungeon.  Each character starts out with some gold, the amount of which
is based on the characters social class (higher is better), charisma (higher
is better), sex (female characters start with more gold), and other stats
(less powerful characters start with more gold).  Each character also starts
out with a few useful items, which may be kept, or sold to a shop-keeper for
more gold.

Each character has an armor class, representing how well the character can
avoid damage and how much damage does the armor stop, reducing the amount
of HP the player loses from physical blows.  The armor class is affected
by dexterity and your equipment.

Each character has hit points, representing how much damage the character can
sustain before he dies.  Your hit points are derived from your race, class,
level, and constitution, and can be temporarily boosted by magical means.
Hit points may be regained by resting, or by a variety of magical means.

Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how many spells
a character can cast. Your spell points are derived from your class,
level, and intelligence (for magic classes) or wisdom (for priestly
classes). Spell points may be regained by resting, or by a few magical
means.


=== Races ===

There are thirty different races that you can choose from in Angband.  Some
races are restricted as to what profession they may be, and each race has
its own adjustments to a character's stats and abilities. Most races also
have intrinsic abilities.

          Human
               The  human  is  the  base character. All other races are com-
               pared  to  them.  Humans can choose any class and are average
               at  everything.  Humans  tend to go up levels faster than any
               other  race  because  of  their shorter life spans. No racial
               adjustments or intrinsics occur to characters choosing human.

          Half-Elf
               Half-elves  tend  to  be smarter and faster than a human, but
               not  as  strong. Half-elves are slightly better at searching,
               disarming,  saving throws, stealth, bows, and magic, but they
               are  not  as  good at hand weapons. Half-elves may choose any
               class and do not receive any intrinsic abilities.

          Elf
               Elves  are  better  magicians then humans, but not as good at
               fighting.  They  tend  to  be  smarter and faster than either
               humans  or  half-elves and also have better wisdom. Elves are
               better  at  searching,  disarming, perception, stealth, bows,
               and  magic,  but  they are not as good at hand weapons. Elves
               may  choose  any  class  except  Paladin.  They  resist light
               effects intrinsically.

          Hobbits
               Hobbits, or Halflings, are very good at bows, throwing,  and
               have good saving throws.  They also are very good at search-
               ing, disarming, perception, and stealth; so they make excel-
               lent rogues, but prefer to be called burglars.  They will be
               much weaker than humans, and no good at melee fighting.
               Halflings have fair infravision, so they can detect warm
               creatures at a distance.  Hobbits can choose between being a
               warrior, mage, or rogue.  They have their dexterity and
               luck sustained. They are very fond of food, and learn, in
               due time, to cook a delicious meal from available
               ingredients.

          Gnome
               Gnomes are smaller than dwarves but larger than halflings.
               They, like the halflings, live in the earth in burrow-like
               homes. Gnomes make excellent mages, and have very good saving
               throws. They are good at searching, disarming, perception,
               and stealth. They have lower strength than humans so they are
               not very good at fighting with hand weapons. Gnomes have fair
               infra-vision, so they can detect warm-blooded creatures at a
               distance. A gnome may choose between being a warrior, mage,
               priest, or rogue. Gnomes are intrinsically protected against
               paralysis and some slowing effects. At higher levels, Gnomes
               learn to teleport at will.

          Dwarf
               Dwarves are the headstrong miners and fighters of legend.
               Since dungeons are the natural home of a dwarf, they are
               excellent choices for a warrior or priest.  Dwarves tend to
               be stronger and tougher but slower and less intelligent than
               humans.  Because they are so headstrong and are somewhat wise,
               they resist spells which are cast on them.  Dwarves also have
               very good infra-vision because they live underground.  They
               do have one big drawback, though.  Dwarves are loudmouthed and
               proud, singing in loud voices, arguing with themselves for no
               good reason, screaming out challenges at imagined foes.  In
               other words, dwarves have a miserable stealth.  They can never
               be blinded.  Dwarves also learn to study the structure of a
               dungeon, and can spot things that go unseen by the other races.

          Half-Orc
               Half-Orcs make excellent warriors and decent priests, but
               are terrible at magic.  They are as bad as dwarves at stealth,
               and horrible at searching, disarming, and perception.
               Half-Orcs are, let's face it, ugly.  They tend to pay more for
               goods in town.  Half-Orcs do make good warriors and rogues,
               for the simple reason that Half-Orcs tend to have great
               constitutions and lots of hit points.  Because of their
               preference to living underground to on the surface, half-orcs
               resist darkness attacks.  Upon reaching experience level 3, a
               half-orc learns to dispel any fear that may be upon him or her.

          Half-Troll
               Half-Trolls  are  incredibly strong, and have more hit points
               than  any other character race. They are also very stupid and
               slow.  They  will  make great warriors and iffy priests. They
               are  bad  at  searching,  disarming, perception, and stealth.
               They  are so ugly that a Half-Orc grimaces in their presence.
               They  also happen to be fun to run... Half-trolls always have
               their strength sustained. At higher levels, Half-Trolls learn
               to enter a berserk fury, and regenerate wounds automatically.

          Dunadan
               The  Dunedain  are a longliving race of men, who are endowed
               with  numerous advantages, not only their longevity. They are
               very   tough  and  endurant;  their  constitution  cannot  be
               reduced,  and their ability to heal wounds far surpasses that
               of  any  other  race.  Having seen virtually everything, very
               little  is new to them, and they gain levels much slower than
               the  other  races.  But should they advance high enough, they
               will  learn the innate Dunedain powers of Straight Road
               Walking and Shadow Shifting.

          High-Elf
               High-elves  are  a  race  of  immortal beings dating from the
               beginning  of  time.  They are masters of all skills, and are
               strong  and  intelligent,  although their wisdom is sometimes
               suspect.  They  can play all classes except Paladin, and very
               well  at  that.  High-elves begin their lives able to see the
               unseen,  and  resist  light  effects just like regular elves.
               However,  there  are  few  things  that  they  have  not seen
               already, and experience is very hard for them to gain.

        Barbarian
               Barbarians  are  hardy  men  of the north. They are fierce in
               combat,  and  their  wrath  is  feared  throughout the world.
               Combat  is  their  life: they feel no fear, and they learn to
               enter  battle  frenzy  at  will even sooner than half-trolls.
               Barbarians  are,  however,  suspicious  of magic, which makes
               magic  devices  fairly  hard  for them to use, and also makes
               it  impossible  for  them  to  play  Mages.  They cannot play
               Paladins,  either,  because  their  wild bloodlust is totally
               incompatible with the strict discipline of knighthood.

        Half-Ogre
               Half-Ogres  are  like  Half-Orcs,  but only more so. They are
               big,  bad,  and  stupid.  For  warriors,  they  have  all the
               necessary attributes, and they can even become wizards: after
               all,  they  are  related  to  Ogre  Magi, from whom they have
               learned  the  skill of setting trapped runes once their level
               is  high  enough.  Like Half- Orcs, they resist darkness, and
               like Half-Trolls, they have their strength sustained.

        Half-Giant
               Half-Giants   are  not  too  unusual,  as  there  has  been a
               tradition  according  to  which it is a noble and brave thing
               to  do  to  consort a giant (especially a giant-maid). Never-
               theless,  the  poor  offspring of such a union is seldom very
               popular in the world of men. Their limited intelligence makes
               it  impossible for them to become full spellcasters, but with
               their  huge  strength they make excellent warriors. They also
               love  to wander in the wilderness, and can become rangers. No
               ordinary  wall  can  withstand  the  fury  of  a  giant, or a
               half-giant,  and at higher levels they can learn the power of
               magical  digging.  Their  thick  skin makes them resistant to
               shards,  and like Half-Ogres and Half-Trolls, they have their
               strength sustained.

        Half-Titan
               Half-mortal descendants of the mighty titans, these immensely
               powerful  creatures  put almost any other race to shame. They
               may  lack  the  fascinating  special  powers of certain other
               races,  but  their  enhanced attributes more than make up for
               that. They learn to estimate the strengths of their foes, and
               their  love  for  law  and  order makes them resistant to the
               effects of Chaos.

        Cyclops
               With  but  one eye, a cyclops can see more than many with two
               eyes.  They  are headstrong, and loud noises bother them very
               little.  They  are  not  quite  qualified for the magic using
               professions,  but  as a certain Mr Ulysses can testify, their
               accuracy with thrown rocks can be deadly...

        Yeek
               Yeeks  are  among  the  most pathetic creatures. Fortunately,
               their  horrible  screams  can scare away less confident foes,
               and  their  skin  becomes more and more resistant to acid, as
               they  gain  experience. But having said that, even a mediocre
               monster can proverbially wipe the floor with an unwary yeek.

        Klackon
               Klackons  are  bizarre  semi-intelligent  ant-like  insectoid
               creatures.  They  make great servants and warriors, but their
               mental   abilities   are   severely   limited.  Obedient  and
               well-ordered,  they can never be confused. They are also very
               nimble,  and  become  faster as they advance levels. They are
               also  very  acidic, inherently resisting acid, and capable of
               spitting acid at higher levels.

        Kobold
               Kobolds  are  a weak goblin race. They love poisoned weapons,
               and  can  learn  to throw poisoned darts (of which they carry
               an  unlimited  supply). They are also inherently resistant to
               poison,  and  can become adequate fighters, although they are
               not one of the more powerful races.

        Nibelung
               The  hated  and  persecuted  race of nocturnal dwarves, these
               cave-dwellers  are  not  much  bothered  by  darkness.  Their
               natural  inclination to magical items has made them immune to
               effects  which  could  drain  away  magical  energy, and like
               ordinary  dwarves,  they  can examine the dungeon to discover
               traps and secret doors.

        Dark Elf
               Another  dark,  cave-dwelling  race,  likewise  unhampered by
               darkness  attacks,  the  Dark Elves have a long tradition and
               knowledge  of  magic. With their intelligence they can become
               superb  mages  or  priests,  and  they have an inherent magic
               missile  attack  available to them at a low level. With their
               keen  sight, they also learn to see invisible things as their
               relatives High-Elves do, but at a higher level.

        Draconian
               A  humanoid race with dragon-like attributes. As they advance
               levels,  they  gain  new  elemental resistances (up to Poison
               Resistance),  and  they  also  have  a  breath  weapon, which
               becomes  more  powerful  with  experience.  The exact type of
               the breath weapon depends on the draconian's class and level.
               With  their  wings,  they  can  easily  escape  any  pit trap
               unharmed.

        Mind Flayer
               A  secretive  and mysterious ancient race. Their civilization
               may  well  be  older  than any other on our planet, and their
               intelligence  and  wisdom are naturally sustained, and are so
               great  that  they enable Mind Flayers to become more powerful
               spellcasters  than  any  other  race,  even if their physical
               attributes  are  a  good deal less admirable. As they advance
               levels,  they gain the powers of See Invisible, Telepathy and
               a mind blast attack.

        Imp
               A  demon-creature  from the nether-world, naturally resistant
               to  fire  attacks, and capable of learning fire bolt and fire
               ball  attacks.  They are little loved by other races, but can
               perform fairly well in most professions.

        Golem
               A  golem is an artificial creature, built from a lifeless raw
               material  like  clay,  and  awakened to life. They are nearly
               mindless,  making  them useless for professions which rely on
               magic,  but  as  warriors  they  are  very  tough.  They  are
               resistant  to poison, they can see invisible things, and move
               freely,  but  have  a  penalty  to speed due to their lack of
               orientation   (the   penalty  grows  smaller  and  eventually
               disppears  as  the  golem  raises  his  INT score). At higher
               levels,  they also become resistant to attacks which threaten
               to   drain   away  their  life  force.  They  also  learn  to
               temporarily  turn  their  skin  into  a  very hard, stonelike
               substance.  In  the  most  recent  version,  golems gain very
               little  nutrition  from  ordinary  food. They need to collect
               scrolls  of  satisfy hunger, or perish of exhaustion when the
               life  force animating their body runs out. In the most recent
               version golems also gain natural armor class bonus from their
               tough body.

        Skeleton
               There are two types of skeletons: the ordinary, warrior- like
               skeletons,  and  the  spell-using  skeletons,  which are also
               called liches. As undead beings, skeletons need to worry very
               little  about  poison or attacks that can drain life. They do
               not  really  use eyes for perceiving things, and are thus not
               fooled  by  invisibility.  Their bones are resistant to sharp
               shrapnels  (not  much  to  cut  there), and they will quickly
               become resistant to cold. Should a skeleton be unlucky enough
               to  lose  some  of  his or her remaining life, he or she will
               learn to restore it at will. It is very hard for skeletons to
               eat  food  or  drink potions. Although the magical effects of
               these  will  affect  the  skeleton  even without entering the
               skeleton's  (non-  existent)  belly, the potion / food itself
               will  fall through the skeleton's jaws, giving no nutritional
               benefit.

        Zombie
               Much like Skeletons, Zombies too are undead horrors: they are
               resistant   to   life-draining  attacks,  and  can  learn  to
               restore   their   life-force.  Like  skeletons,  they  become
               resistant   to  cold-based  attacks  (actually  earlier  than
               skeletons),  resist poison and can see invisible. While still
               vulnerable   to   cuts   (unlike   skeletons),   Zombies  are
               resistant  to  Nether.  Like  golems,  they  gain very little
               nutrition  from  the  food  of mortals. However, Zombies are,
               as  the  name implies, practically mindless: in this company,
               Groo would seem a genius.

        Vampire
               One  of  the  mightier  undead  creatures,  the Vampire is an
               awe-inspiring  sight.  Yet this mighty creature has a serious
               weakness:  the  bright  rays of sun are its bane, and it will
               need  to flee the surface to the deep recesses of earth until
               the sun finally sets. Darkness, on the other hand, only makes
               the  Vampire stronger. As undead, the Vampire has a firm hold
               on  its  life  force, and resists nether attacks. The Vampire
               also  resists  cold and poison based attacks. It is, however,
               susceptible  to  its  perpetual hunger for fresh blood, which
               can  only  be  satiated  by  sucking  the blood from a nearby
               monster,  which  is the Vampire's special power. It should be
               noted  that  the  Vampires  are so sensitive to daylight that
               even  certain  artifact  light  items  which  are filled with
               daylight  will  hurt  them  if  they  try to wield the items.
               Fortunately,  the  vampires  do  not really need these items,
               since  they  radiate  an  aura  of 'dark light' of their own.
               Light  resistance will, in any case, protect the vampire from
               the adverse effects of sunlight.

        Spectre
               Another  powerful  undead  creature: the spectre is a ghastly
               apparition, surrounded by an unearthly green glow. They exist
               only  partially  on  our  plane of existence: half-corporeal,
               they  can  pass  through  walls,  although the density of the
               wall will hurt them in the process of doing this. The spectre
               can  scream an eldritch howl, which is enough to scare lesser
               monsters  witless.  As undead, they have a firm hold on their
               life  force,  see invisible, and resist poison and cold. They
               also  resist  nether;  in  fact,  their  half-corporeal  form
               actually  grows  stronger  from  the  effects  of  nether. At
               higher  levels  they  develop  telepathic abilities. Spectres
               make  superb  spellcasters,  but  their physical form is very
               weak.  Like  Golems  and  Zombies,  Spectres  gain  almost no
               nutrition from ordinary food.

        Ent
                The Ents are a powerful race dating from the beginning of the
                world, eldest of all animals or plants who inhabit Arda.
                Spirits from afar, they were summoned to guard the forests of
                Middle-earth. As the Shepherds of the Trees, they have the
                innate power to cause trees to rise about them for protection.

        Beastman
               This  race is a blasphemous abomination produced by Chaos. It
               is  not  an  independent race but rather a humanoid creature,
               most  often  a  human,  twisted by the Chaos, or a nightmarsh
               crossbreed   of  a  human  and  a  beast.  All  Beastmen  are
               accustomed  to  Chaos  so  much  that  they are untroubled by
               confusion  and  sound,  although  raw  Logrus  can still have
               effects  on  them. Beastmen revel in chaos, as it twists them
               more  and  more. Beastmen are subject to mutations: when they
               have been created, they receive a few random mutations. After
               that,  every  time they advance a level they have some chance
               of gaining yet another mutation.


=== Classes ===

          Once a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class.  Some
          classes are not recommended to certain races: for instance a Half
          Troll  shouldn't  become a Paladin.  For the first few adventures
          it  is  suggested that you run a warrior or rogue.  Spell casting
          generally requires a more experienced  player  that  is  familiar
          with survival techniques.

          Warrior
               A Warrior is a hack-and-slash character, who solves most  of
               his  problems  by cutting them to pieces, but will occasion-
               ally fall back  on the help of a magical device.  His  prime
               stats  are  Strength  and Constitution, and a good Dexterity
               can really help at times.  A Warrior will be good at  Fight-
               ing and Throwing/Bows, but bad at most other skills.
               A Warrior learns no magic.

          Mage
               A Mage must live by his wits.  He cannot hope to simply hack
               his  way  through the dungeon, and so must therefore use his
               magic to defeat,  deceive, confuse, and escape.  A  mage  is
               not really complete without an assortment of magical devices
               to use in addition to his spells.  He can master the  higher
               level  magical  devices far easier than anyone else, and has
               the best saving throw to resist effects of  spells  cast  at
               him.  Intelligence  and   Dexterity  are  his primary stats.
               There is no rule that says  a  mage  cannot  become  a  good
               fighter, but he  feels  uncomfortable  with anything heavier
               than a dagger, and spells are his primary advantage.
               A mage can choose any two realms of magic in which he wishes
               to specialize.

          Priest
               A Priest is a character of holy devotion.  They explore  the
               dungeon  only  to destroy the evil that lurks within, and if
               treasure just happens to fall into  their  packs,  well,  so
               much  more  to  the  glory of their church!  Priests receive
               their spells from a deity, and therefore do not choose which
               spells they will learn.  They are familiar with magical dev-
               ices, preferring to call them instruments of  god,  but  are
               not  as good as a mage in their use.  Priests have good sav-
               ing throws,  and  make  decent  fighters,  preferring  blunt
               weapons  over  edged  ones.  Wisdom  and  Charisma  are  the
               priest's primary stats.
               There are two types of priests:  the 'good' Priests who  are
               trained in Life magic, and the 'evil' dark Priests who  have
               chosen to study  Death magic instead.  In addition to  their
               primary  realm  of  magic (Life or Death  magic),  they  can
               select a secondary elemental or Arcane realm.

          Rogue
               A Rogue is a character that prefers to live by his  cunning,
               but  is capable of fighting his way out of a tight spot.  He
               is the master of traps and locks, no device being impossible
               for  him  to  overcome.  A rogue has a high stealth allowing
               him to sneak around many creatures without having to  fight,
               or sneak up and get the first blow.  A rogue's perception is
               higher than any other class, and many times he will notice a
               trap  or  secret  door  before having to search.  A rogue is
               better than warriors or paladins with magical  devices,  but
               still  can  not  rely on their performance.  Rogues can also
               learn a few spells, but not the  powerful  offensive  spells
               mages can use.  A rogue's primary stats are Intelligence and
               Dexterity.
               Rogues can  also  steal  gold  from  monsters (humanoids
               and dragons  are  known  to  yield  the best loot), but
               beware - too much audacity  may cause the whole level to
               turn on you. Rogues  who  wish  to  specialize  as
               burglars can choose to study Arcane or Air while Death
               magic is available to rogues  who wish to become
               Assassins.  In  the  latest  versions, Arcane magic is
               available for 'common' thieves, and Trump magic for card
               sharks.

          Ranger
               A Ranger is a nature-based warrior.  He is a good
               fighter,  and  the best  of  the  classes  with a
               missile weapon such as a bow. The ranger learns spells
               much more slowly than a  mage,  but is  capable  of 
               learning all  but the most powerful spells. Because a
               ranger is really  a  dual  class  character,  more
               experience  is  required for him to advance.  A ranger
               has a good stealth, good perception, good searching, a
               good saving throw,  and is good with magical devices. 
               His primary stats are Intelligence and Dexterity.               
               All  rangers  are  trained  in  Earth  magic. They can
               also select  a secondary realm of magic  (from  Air,
               Water, Fire or Death), but their skills are more limited
               in the second realm than in their native Nature magic.

          Paladin
               A Paladin is a warrior/priest.  He is a very  good  fighter,
               second  only to the warrior class, but not very good at mis-
               sile weapons.  He receives prayers at a slower pace then the
               priest,  but  can even  receive the most  powerful  prayers.
               Because a paladin is  really  a  dual  class  character,  it
               requires  more  experience  to advance him.  A paladin lacks
               much in the way of abilities.  He is poor at  stealth,  per-
               ception,  searching,  and  magical devices.  He has a decent
               saving throw due to his divine alliance.  His primary  stats
               are Strength and Charisma.
               All paladins are trained in Life magic, and they regard 
               the realms of magic as the work of evil forces. The
               variant class,  the "Death Knight",  is  trained in
               Death magic instead of  Life magic.

          Warrior-Mage
               A Warrior-Mage is precisely what the name suggests: a  cross
               between the warrior  and mage classes. While their brothers,
               the Rangers, specialize in Earth  magic and survival skills,
               true Warrior-Mages attempt to reach the best of both worlds:
               as magicians,  they are  trained  in  Arcane magic  and  can
               select  another realm,  eventually  learning every spell  in
               both of them  (although  slower  than  true  magicians);  as
               warriors they are much superior to the usual Mage class. The
               Warrior-Mage  is   a   truly  powerful  class,    which   is
               recommended  for  the  players   who want to cast spells but
               whose mages tend to  die too quickly.   However,  the  power
               does not  come  without  a  price:   Warrior-Mages   require
               more experience  to  advance levels than any other class.

          Chaos Warrior
               Chaos Warriors are the feared servants of the terrible Demon
               Lords of Chaos. Every Chaos Warrior has a Patron Demon, such
               as  Arioch,  Mabelode  or  Balaan.  Whenever a Chaos Warrior
               advances a  level,  his Patron Demon  may reward him with  a
               Gift of Chaos: he might be healed or polymorphed,  his stats
               could be increased, or he might be rewarded with  an awesome
               weapon.  Or his  Patron Demon  might,  for some reason,  get
               annoyed with him and do something fairly nasty to him,  like
               surround him  with monsters,  drain his stats  or  wreck his
               equipment. Or they might simply ignore him. The Demon  Lords
               of Chaos  are  chaotic and  unpredictable indeed.  The exact
               type of reward depends on  the Patron Demon Lord  (different
               Demons give different rewards) and chance.
               Chaos Warriors  are  very good fighters,  but they are  also
               trained  in  Chaos  magic,  and  can learn every Chaos spell.
               Due to  their  affinity  to chaotic things, they do not feel
               comfortable with a weapon  that  does  not  have the chaotic
               taint.

          Monk
               The Monk  character class is  very different from all  other
               classes. Although they can use weapons and armour just  like
               any other class, their training in  martial arts makes  them
               much more powerful with  no armour nor weapons.  To gain the
               resistances necessary  for survival at higher levels  a monk
               may need to wear some kind of armour,  but if the armour  he
               wears is too heavy,  it  will  severely disturb  his martial
               arts maneuvers. As the monk advances levels,  new,  powerful
               forms of attack become available. His defensive capabilities
               (blocking and dodging) increase likewise,  but if armour  is
               being worn, their effect decreases. It is rumoured that  the
               monastic training even  makes  monks faster than  any  other
               character class!  Fortunately,  also the amount of armour  a
               monk  can  wear,  while  still  fighting  efficiently,  also
               increases with experience.
               There are three kinds of monasteries: those devoted to Life,
               those devoted to Nature,  and those devoted to Death.  These
               are the three possible realms of magic  available to a monk,
               who can learn every prayer in the realm of his choice.

        Mindcrafter
               The Mindcrafter is a character who  uses  the powers of
	       mind instead of magic. These powers are unique to the
	       Mindcrafter class, and vary from simple extrasensory
	       powers  to  mental domination  of others.  These powers
	       are  developed by the practice of certain disciplines, 
	       but still need an external object, called a focus, in
	       order to be invoked. The Mindcrafter uses the wisdom
	       score to determine how well they can perform the psychic
               powers. In combat a Mindcrafter is but a little better
               than  a plain mage.

        High Mage
               High  Mages  are  specialist Mages  of the highest order. In
               most respects they are exactly like ordinary Mages, although
               their  spell stat is slightly higher.   Instead of selecting
               two realms of magic,  a High Mage selects  only one realm of
               magic  and  studies it extremely well,   gaining substantial
               benefits in mana costs, minimum levels  and  failure  rates.
               Like ordinary mages, they do not like heavy weapons.


=== Stats ===

          Strength
               Strength is important in fighting with weapons and in melee
               combat.  A high strength can improve your chances of hitting
               as well as the amount of damage done with each hit.  Char-
               acters with low strengths may receive penalties.  Strength
               is also useful in tunneling and in carrying heavy items.

          Intelligence
               Intelligence affects the spellcasting abilities of mage-like
               spellcasters, mages, rangers, and rogues.  Intelligence
               will affect the number of spells you may learn each level as
               well as the number of spell points you receive.  A high
               intelligence may also improve your chances of successfully
               casting a spell.  You cannot learn spells if your intelligence
               is 7 or lower.  A good intelligence can also help with using
               magic devices, picking locks, and disarming traps.

          Wisdom
               The primary function of wisdom is to determine the ability
               of a priest or paladin to use prayers, just like intelligence
               affects spellcasting.  Again, high wisdom will increase the
               number of spell points you have and increase the number of
               prayers you can learn each level, while improving the chance
               that a prayer will be successful.  A good wisdom can also
               help to improve your chances of resisting magical spells cast
               upon you by monsters.

          Dexterity
               Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness.  A high
               dexterity may allow a character to get multiple blows with
               lighter weapons, thus greatly increasing his kill power, and
               will increase his chances of hitting with any weapon and
               dodging blows from enemies.  Dexterity is also useful in
               picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting yourself from
               some of the thieves that inhabit the dungeons.

          Constitution
               Constitution is a character's ability to resist damage to his
               body, and to recover from damage received.  Therefore a
               character with a high constitution will receive more hit
               points and also recover them faster while resting.

          Charisma
               Charisma represents a character's personality and physical
               appearance.  A character with a high charisma will receive
               better prices from store owners, whereas a character with a
               very low charisma may be robbed blind.  A high charisma will
               also mean more starting money for the character.


=== Abilities ===

          Characters possess some different abilities which can  help  them
          to survive.  The starting abilities of a character are based upon
          race and class.  Abilities may be adjusted by high or low  stats,
          and may increase with the level of the character.

          Fighting
               Fighting is the ability to hit and do damage with weapons or
               fists.  Normally  a  character  gets  a single blow from any
               weapon, but if his dexterity and strength are  high  enough,
               he  may  receive  more blows per round with lighter weapons.
               Strength and Dexterity both modify the  ability  to  hit  an
               opponent.  This skill increases  with the level of the char-
               acter.
               Various classes have their preferred and shunned weapons
               (except for warriors, who are good at everything equally).

          Shooting Ability
               Using  ranged  missile  weapons  (and  throwing  objects) is
               included  in this skill.  Different stats apply to different
               weapons, but this ability may modify the distance an  object
               is  thrown/fired, the amount of damage done, and the ability
               to hit a creature.  This skill increases with the  level  of
               the character.

          Saving Throws
               A Saving Throw is the ability of a character to  resist  the
               effects  of  a spell cast on him by another person/creature.
               This does not include spells cast on the player by  his  own
               stupidity,  such  as  quaffing a nasty potion.  This ability
               increases with the level of the  character,  but  then  most
               high  level  creatures  are  better at casting spells, so it
               tends to even out.  A high wisdom also increases this  abil-
               ity.

          Stealth
               The ability to move  silently about is very useful.  Charac-
               ters with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents,
               gaining the first blow.  Also, creatures may fail to  notice
               a  stealthy  character  entirely, allowing a player to avoid
               certain fights.  This skill is based entirely upon race  and
               class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.

          Disarming
               Disarming is the  ability  to  remove  traps  (safely),  and
               includes  picking  locks  on  traps and doors.  A successful
               disarming will gain the character  some experience.  A  trap
               must  be  found  before  it  can be disarmed.  Dexterity and
               intelligence both modify the ability  to  disarm,  and  this
               ability increases with the level of the character.

          Magical Devices
               Using a magical device such as  a  wand  or  staff  requires
               experience  and  knowledge.  Spell  users such as  magi  and
               priests are therefore much better at using a magical  device
               than say a warrior.  This skill is modified by intelligence,
               and increases with the level of the character.

          Searching Frequency (Perception)
               Perception  is  the  ability  to  notice  something  without
               actively  seeking it out.  This skill is based entirely upon
               race and class, and  will  never  improve  unless  magically
               enhanced.

          Searching Ability (Searching)
               To search is to actively look for secret doors, floor traps,
               and  traps on chests.  Rogues are the best at searching, but
               magi,  rangers, and priests are also good at it.  This skill
               is  based  entirely  upon  race  and  class,  and will never
               improve unless magically enhanced.

           Tactics
               You  can  manouever  the  way  you  behave when faced with a
               monster  by  changing your tactics. Aggresive tactics raises
               your  to-hit  and to-dam bonuses, but lowers stealth and AC.
               Playing  a  coward does just the reverse. Tactics is changed
               from the 'character screen' by pressing 't'

=== Combinations of Race and Class ===

These are the classes that are recommended for different races. You can
still select a race that is not in the chart, but these combinations are
either rather poor (like a zombie mage) or as a concept so silly that they
are not recommended. If you pick a combination that is not on the chart,
don't complain if things don't turn out as you expected them to.


            Warrior  Mage    Priest  Rogue   Ranger  Paladin Warrior Chaos
                                                             -Mage  Warrior
Human         Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes
Half-Elf      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes
Elf           Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      Yes     No
Hobbit        Yes     Yes     No      Yes     No      No      No      No
Gnome         Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      No      No
Dwarf         Yes     No      Yes     No      No      No      No      No
Half-Orc      Yes     No      Yes     Yes     No      No      No      Yes
Half-Troll    Yes     No      Yes     No      No      No      No      No
Dunadan       Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes
High-Elf      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      Yes     No
Barbarian     Yes     No      Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      Yes
Half-Ogre     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      No      No      No
Half-Giant    Yes     No      No      No      Yes     No      No      No
Half-Titan    Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      Yes     No      No
Cyclops       Yes     No      Yes     No      No      No      No      No
Yeek          Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      No      No
Klackon       Yes     No      No      No      Yes     No      No      No
Kobold        Yes     No      No      Yes     No      No      No      No
Nibelung      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      No      No
Dark Elf      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      Yes     Yes
Draconian     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      No      Yes     No
Mind Flayer   No      Yes     Yes     No      No      No      Yes     No
Imp           Yes     Yes     No      Yes     No      No      Yes     Yes
Golem         Yes     No      No      No      No      No      No      No
Skeleton      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      No      No
Zombie        Yes     No      No      No      No      No      No      No
Vampire       Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes
Spectre       No      Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      Yes     No
Ent           Yes     No      Yes     No      No      Yes     Yes     No
Beastman      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     No      No      Yes     Yes



                     Mind-   High
            Monk    crafter  Mage
Human         Yes     Yes     Yes
Half-Elf      Yes     Yes     Yes
Elf           Yes     Yes     Yes
Hobbit        No      No      Yes
Gnome         No      Yes     Yes
Dwarf         No      No      No
Half-Orc      Yes     No      No
Half-Troll    No      No      No
Dunadan       Yes     Yes     Yes
High-Elf      Yes     Yes     Yes
Barbarian     No      No      No
Half-Ogre     No      No      Yes
Half-Giant    No      No      No
Half-Titan    Yes     Yes     Yes
Cyclops       No      No      No
Yeek          No      Yes     Yes
Klackon       No      No      No
Kobold        No      No      No
Nibelung      No      No      Yes
Dark Elf      Yes     Yes     Yes
Draconian     Yes     Yes     Yes
Mind Flayer   Yes     Yes     Yes
Imp           Yes     Yes     Yes
Golem         No      No      No
Skeleton      Yes     Yes     Yes
Zombie        No      No      No
Vampire       Yes     Yes     Yes
Spectre       Yes     Yes     Yes
Ent           No      No      Yes
Beastman      Yes     Yes     Yes




=== Miscellaneous ===


          Infra-vision
               Infra-vision is the ability to see heat sources. Since  most
               of  the  dungeon is cool or cold, infra-vision will not allow
               the player to see walls and objects.  Infra-vision will allow
               a  character  to see any warm-blooded creatures up to a cer-
               tain distance.  This ability works equally well with or with
               out  a  light source.  The majority of Angband's creatures are
               cold-blooded, and will not be detected unless lit  up  by  a
               light  source.  Most non human races have innate  infra-vision
               ability.  Human can gain infra-vision only if it is magically
               enhanced.

           Sanity
               Adventuring in the dungeons and  meeting  strange, unheard-of
               monsters  can  be  dangerous  to  your mental  health. Sanity
               helps  you  to  withstand  the  horrors  you  will  encounter
               better,  and  generally  makes you more resistant to monsters
               which cause  insanity  when attacking.  Sanity is affected by
               Wisdom, like  Saving  Throw.  It cannot be cured by resting -
               only special Potions of  Cure  Insanity  will restore it (the
               town Temples, fortunately, sell large stocks of them).
               If your sanity drops below 0, your mind finally yields to the
               overwhelming dungeon feeling of insanity.  You die...

[Stat tables removed - they belong to spoiler files now; GSN]

Weapon skills for each class:

              Best        So-so      Pathetic    Don't even try
              
Warriors:               (everything on equal level)
Mages/H.M:    daggers     swords,    axes,       2-h
                          hafted     polearms
Priests:      hafted      axes,      daggers     swords, 2-h*
                          polearms
Rogue:        daggers     polearms,  axes,       2-h
                          swords     hafted
Ranger:       axes,       polearms   hafted,     2-h
              swords                 daggers
Paladin:      hafted,     swords,    axes, 2-h   ----
              polearms    daggers
Warrior-M:    daggers     swords,    axes, 2-h   ----
                          hafted,
                          axes
Chaos W:      swords      axes, 2-h, polearms    hafted
                          daggers
Monk**:       hafted      swords,    polearms    axes, 2-h
                          daggers
Mindy:        daggers     swords,    polearms    axes, 2-h
                          hafted

Of course, the ratings are relative to the class' general weapon handling.
A paladin would still handle a 2-h sword better than many mages would a
normal sword.

* Priests get NO level skill advancement in these weapon types
** Monks are supposed to fight barehanded (or with staves = hafted weapons,
it will be a separate weapon class in the future)

(digging weapons are not included, since they're rather useless in combat
except for warriors and maybe warrior-mages)
