=== Stores and Buildings ===

Each town contains a variety of buildings you can enter.  Most such
buildings are stores, where you can sell items you no longer need, or
buy their offerings.  Each store has their own set of items they buy
and sell, and you can best get used to which store buys and sells
which items by entering and looking at their inventory.  A few of the
less obvious store types include:

Temples: magic books, scrolls, potions, armor, ammunition, and
hafted weapons.
Black Market / Bazaar: they buy and sell all items, but at rather
unfriendly prices.
Fletcher: they buy and sell missile weapons and ammunition.
Milliner: this store specializes in helms and crowns.

Other buildings come in three general types.

Your home is a building like a store where you can store items you
don't want to carry with you.

Many other buildings offer magical or non-magical services you may
wish to take advantage of.  Specifically,

Weaponmaster: Examines and analyzes your weapon, for a price.
Zymurgist: Can help you recharge your wands, staves, and rods.
Magesmith: Can enchant your armor or weapons for you.
Mutatilist: Can expose you to raw chaos to cause a mutation.
Map Maker: Allows you to learn about the wilderness map in your area.
Library: Allows you to learn a lot of information about monsters.
Casino: Allows you to lose money, and will sometimes even pay you.
Inn: You can get a satisfying meal here, and can sleep until morning
  if it is nighttime.
Healer: Will restore your stats if they have been temporarily damaged.
Magetower: Can teleport you to any magetower you have visited where your
  aura has formerly been recorded.
Blacksmith: Can repair faulty but non-cursed weapons and armor, cheap.
Bank: You can take out a loan here, but be aware that they may
  confiscate your home if you don't pay the loan back promptly.

Finally, some buildings are quest buildings where you can pick up
adventuring work.  Some of these buildings also offer magical or
non-magical services.  

Keeps / Castles / Town halls are local leadership buildings that seek
a wide variety of work.

Couriers are always looking for messangers to travel from one town to
another.

Farms can be found in certain areas outside of town only, and like to
employ adventurers to kill off nearby pests.  They are also a good
place to buy food.

Guilds offer services of various types, and may send you on quests of
various types.  Each guild has members that belong to certain classes,
and you will always find a guild you belong to in the starting town
(except if you are a mindcrafter, as they have no guild of their own.)
Thieves' Guilds extend a lower level of membership to anyone who
proves their worth, but the other guilds do not allow outsiders to
gain memership.  However, all guilds will send non-members on quests.
Membership opens access to special services, and significant
discounts.


