=== Classes ===

Once a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class. For the first few
adventures it is suggested that you run a warrior. Spellcasting generally
requires a more experienced player that is familiar with survival techniques.
Note that the class stat bonuses only take effect during character generation.

***** <Warrior>
Warrior
    A Warrior is a hack-and-slash character, who solves most of his problems by
    cutting them to pieces, but will occasionally fall back on the help of a
    magical device. Warrior often gets more blows with melee weapons than the
    other classes. He also gets the best melee criticals against distracted
    monsters, but he doesn't get them as often as the rogue. A Warrior will be
    good at fighting and shooting/throwing, but mediocre at most other skills.

***** <Rogue>
Rogue
    A Rogue is a professional criminal, attracted to the dungeon by the promise
    of hidden riches and great wealth. Rogue is is the only class that can sell
    loot to the shops. Even rogues can only sell *expensive* items - an item's
    evaluated price must be at least your minimum depth in feet. Rogue is the
    only character whose stealth improves with experience. She is the master at
    fighting dirty. She prefers to murder sleeping monsters, or to distract
    opponents with powder vials before assassinating them. When attacking
    sleeping, scared, confused or blind opponents, rogue gets criticals hits
    much more often than other classes. Her criticals are also more deadly,
    especially with thrown weapons. Rogue is the best thrower of all classes.
    She usually spots traps before stumbling on them, and knows more about
    traps than the other classes.

***** <Templar>
Templar
    Templar is a deeply religious knight with a vow of poverty, meaning that he
    only gets to keep 1/3 of the gold he finds, giving the rest to charity.
    Templars are very interested in mysteries and in the occult. They are the
    best alchemists in the game.  Templars are almost as good fighters as
    Warriors, and have almost as many hit points. Unlike Warriors, they are just
    as good archers as melee fighters. They have a superb saving throw. Templars
    practise ancient armed martial arts with swords and bows. Their fencing
    skill gives them an extra sword blow against persons and humanoids. At level
    25 they gain an extra shot with bows. Just like Priests, Templars may offer
    torches for the goddesses in place of ego items, and ego items in place of
    artifacts. (The class is inspired by both Rosicrucianism and the Knights
    Templar.)

***** <Priest>
Priest
    A Priest is a character of holy devotion. He explores the dungeon only in
    order to destroy the evil that lurks within, and if treasure just happens
    to fall into her packs, well, so much more to the glory of her church! The
    priest receives her spells from a deity, and therefore does not choose
    which spells she will learn. He is familiar with magical devices, which she
    calls instruments of god, but is not as good as a mage in their use. A
    priest has good saving throws, and makes a decent fighter, preferring blunt
    weapons over edged ones. Wisdom is the priest's primary stat, determining
    spellcasting ability. Priests are experts at religious practices. If they
    drop any kind of torch on an altar, the goddess treats it as an ego item.
    If they offer an ego item, it is treated as an artifact.

***** <Shaman>
Shaman
    A Shaman is a "primitive" warrior/priest, with a belief system based on
    nature spirits. Shaman is a skilled fighter with blunt or blessed weapons,
    and can often get more blows with them than the other classes. She receives
    prayers at a slower pace then the priest, but can receive even the most
    powerful of prayers. Unlike priest, shaman can choose her prayers, but she
    can't cast her spells in as heavy armour. In addition to priestly prayers,
    shaman also practices her own special form of magic, based on eating
    magical mushrooms, and asking favours from their Mother Spirits. Shaman is
    a very perceptive character, and stealthier than a priest. Because a shaman
    is really a dual class character, it takes more experience to advance her.
    Wisdom determines shaman's spellcasting ability.

***** <Mage>
Mage
    A Mage must live by his wits. He cannot hope to just hack his way through
    the dungeon, and so must therefore use his magic to defeat, deceive,
    confuse, and escape. A mage is not really complete without an assortment of
    magical devices to use in addition to his spells. He can master the higher
    level magical devices far easier than anyone else, and has the best saving
    throw to resist effects of spells cast at him. Memory is his primary stat,
    and determines his spellcasting ability. Wearing heavy armor, or most kinds
    of gloves, will severly damage his spellcasting abilities, so while there
    is no rule that says a mage cannot become a good fighter, most mages will
    prefer to rely on their spells. Depending on race, mages specialise in
    either fire or frost. This affects their resistances and the available
    magical books.

***** <Spellsword>
Spellsword
    A Spellsword belongs to a noble knightly order of civilised warrior mages.
    She is the only character than can cast mage spells in full metal armour,
    including gauntlets. She handles both melee weapons and magical devices
    with great skill, and has lots of hit points. Unlike the ranger, she can
    access the full range of mage spellbooks, though she starts receiving them
    only at level 5. Unfortunately, spellsword's fanatical devotion to the arts
    of combat and magic has severely damaged her common sense. Spellsword's
    magical studies tend tend to lack practical focus, and she learns her
    spells in random order. Spellsword is hopeless at stealth, perception,
    mapping, and at resisting harmful spells. Spellsword is also the slowest of
    all classes to advance. Memory governs spellsword's spellcasting prowess.
    Depending on race, spellswords specialise in either fire or frost. This
    affects their resistances and the available magical books.

***** <Ranger>
Ranger
    A Ranger is part warrior, part mage, and adds a few skills unique to him.
    He is a good fighter, and the best of all classes at firing a bow. Ranger
    gets the best archery criticals against distracted monsters, but he doesn't
    get them as often as the rogue. The ranger learns spells much more slowly
    than a mage, and can only access some of the mage's spellbooks, but has an
    additional set of spells which only he can use. Like all classes with mixed
    sets of skills, more experience is required for him to advance in levels. A
    ranger has good stealth, good perception, good searching, a good saving
    throw, and is quite good with magical devices. Ranger is the best mapper in
    the game. Memory determines his magical ability. Depending on race, rangers
    specialise in either fire or frost. This affects their resistances and the
    available magical books.

***** <Mystic>
Mystic
    A Mystic learns both the holy prayers of priests and the arcane magic of
    mages. While she is the weakest fighter of all the classes, she gains
    spells the fastest, and has the most mana. A mystic relies almost only on
    her spells, and is not very good at activating magical items. She is,
    however, moderately skilled at throwing weapons at her enemies from afar.
    She also has a good stealth. There are said to be rare spellbooks in the
    dungeon that teach her discplines that lie beyond the scope of other
    classes. Her primary stats are Wisdom and Memory, which combine to
    determine her spellcasting power. Depending on race, mystics specialise in
    either fire or frost. This affects their resistances and the available
    magical books.
