=== Attacking and Defending.  Last revised for Oangband 0.3.1 ===

     This file explains the basics of attacking monsters and protecting from the
many, many nasty things they can do to you.  It also includes some information
on special weapons and armor, your monster memory, and how Rogues set traps and 
steal.  A list of druid blows and the damage they do is included at the end.  By 
deliberate policy, this file leaves a lot of information out.  Half the fun is 
discovery...


=== Attacking Monsters ===

There are four ways you can inflict damage on monsters:  melee (hand-to-hand) 
combat, firing missiles and throwing objects, using magical items, and casting 
spells/praying prayers.  

-- Melee Combat --

     Melee can do more damage per turn than any other form of attack, and the
basic equipment (a weapon) is easy to find.  On the other hand, melee only works
against adjacent monsters and takes a great deal of training and equipment to
come into its own deeper in the dungeon.  As you will shortly discover, up-
grading to weapons with higher base damages is vital but heavy weapons are very 
hard to master.  You will have to find a compromise, depending on class, exper-
ience level, and available equipment.  Magical aids to combat (Bless, Heroism, 
and Berserk) can make all the difference when fighting tough monsters.

     Attacking:
         If you move your character into a square containing a monster, you will 
         attack that monster.  If you are wielding no weapon, and are not a
         Druid (who actually much prefer to fight barehanded), you will do very 
         little damage.  If you are wielding a weapon, things are a little diff-
         erent.

     Number of Blows:
         On your character screen ('C') is displayed the number of blows you can 
         get per turn.  If you are wielding no weapon, or your weapon is too 
         heavy for you to wield properly, you get one blow (unless you are a 
         Druid).  Otherwise, you get between two and four blows, depending 
         solely on weapon weight, Dexterity, and Strength.

     Your Weapon:
         All weapons have damage dice, displayed after their name.  When you hit
         a monster with a Dagger (1d4), you will do between 1 and 4 points of
         damage (we assume no bonuses for this example).  In addition to damage
         dice, weapons may also have magical bonuses to Skill and to Deadliness
         (e.g. a Dagger (1d4) (+6, +5)), and various elemental brands and 
         monster slaying abilities (e.g. a Dagger of Fire (1d4) (+10, +10)).

     What Happens When You Hit a Monster:
         If you hit a monster with a dagger, you are rolling one die with four 
         sides (1d4).  One after the other, critical hits, brands/slays, and the 
         Deadliness bonus multiply the number of dice you roll.  Get a good hit
         in with a Dagger of Fire while wearing a Ring of Deadliness, and you 
         can easily end up rolling 6 dice or more (6d4).  Let's look at the 
         damage dice multipliers in turn:

     Combat Skill:     (formerly called the plus to hit)
         Again on the Character screen is shown your fighting skill, a combin-
         ation of innate abilities and bonuses from stats and equipment.  Not 
         merely does this skill allow you even to hit a monster, it also deter-
         mines how often you get critical hits, which are absolutely vital in 
         Oangband.  You know you just got a critical hit when you get any combat
         message other than "you hit" (or punch) "the <<monster name>>".

     Brands and Slays:
         Some remarkable weapons do extra damage to particular kinds of 
         monsters; a Dagger of Fire, for instance, would do extra damage to 
         creatures not immune to fire.  Same story for all the other special
         brands you may find.  Slays, in contrast, do extra damage to particular 
         kinds of monsters, so wield that mace of Orc Slaying if you come upon
         any orcs.

     Deadliness:    (formerly called the plus to damage)
         As you descend deeper into the dungeon, a character relying on melee
         will need to play careful attention to Deadliness.  The first few 
         plusses to Deadliness increase damage by about half a point per plus, 
         but later on they increase the damage done by a hit by 2% each.  2% 
         doesn't seem like much, but it adds up; high-level characters have been 
         known to triple the damage they do on every blow with the Deadliness 
         multiplier alone.

     Special Note:
         In order to attack a creature that you can't see in a wall or door, you 
         must issue the Tunnel or alter adject grid command.


-- Shooting Missiles and Throwing Objects --

Shooting missiles:
     Ranged fire with missile launchers is a non-magical method of doing damage
at a safe distance.  As in melee, lighter weapons are much easier to effectively 
use, but heavier weapons can do enormous damage in skilled hands.  Skill and 
Deadliness bonuses are used from all equipped items other than your melee 
weapon.  As in melee, magical aids to combat (Bless and Heroism) can make all 
the difference, but note that Berserkers make lousy archers and throwers.

     Setting up to Shoot:
         Slings shoot shots and seeker shots, bows shoot arrows and seeker 
         arrows, and crossbows shoot bolts and seeker bolts.  Simply equip the
         weapon and keep plenty of the ammo on hand and you're ready.

     Attacking:
         You shoot at a monster by typing 'f' (or 't' in the roguelike command 
         set), then selecting a missile you would like to fire.  This activates 
         the targetting interface described in the help file on commands.  

     Number of Shots:
         On your character screen ('C') is displayed the number of shots you can 
         get per turn.  The number of shots depends on class and level, plus any
         bonus shots that the weapon provides.  Unlike in melee, extra shots are
         not fired all at once (to avoid wasted ammo).  Instead, each shot takes
         less time, making monsters appear to move in slow motion.

     Your Launcher and Ammo:
         All launchers have a multiplier to damage, for example a Longbow (x3) 
         would multiply the damage dice of the ammo it fires by three.  Like
         melee weapons, launchers can have plusses to Skill and to Deadliness.
         Unlike such weapons, they can have bonuses to shots, bonuses to their 
         damage multiplier, and cannot impart slays and brands.  Ammo also can 
         have bonuses to Skill and to Deadliness, and occasionally posses the 
         same kinds of slays and brands you can find on melee weapons.

     What Happens When You Hit a Monster:
         Here, archery and melee are virtually identical, with the biggest 
         difference being that missile weapons have a damage multiplier.  After 
         that is figured in, everything works the same.  Like in melee, Skill
         is essential to fighting effectively, having the right slays for tough 
         targets is very handy, and Deadliness can make all the difference in 
         the long run.


Throwing Objects:
     Throwing objects requires less skill than using missile weapons, and can 
be an important combat method in Oangband.  On the other hand, most thrown 
objects do not benefit from Skill and Deadliness bonuses from other equipped 
items.  For novice adventurers, throwing flasks of oil can be a life-saver, 
and there are rumors of objects deep in the dungeon that can do large amounts 
of damage when thrown.  Perhaps the most effective use of a high throwing skill 
is whipping daggers, spears, throwing axes, and throwing hammers at your foes.  

     Attacking:
         To throw an object, you use the 'v' command and select any item in 
         your backpack, on your person, or on the floor.  This activates the 
         targetting interface described in the help file on commands.
  
     Number of Throws:
         You may never throw more than one item per turn.

     Your Thrown Object:
         All objects have damage dice, but most do not display them.  If you 
         think an object should do nasty things to your foes, it's certainly 
         worth trying to throw it at them, just to see if anything happens.  
         Whether or not they display them, all thrown objects may benefit from 
         bonuses to Skill and Deadliness, should they possess any.  In addition, 
         throwing weapons may have the same kind of elemental brands and monster 
         slaying abilities as other weapons do.  If they possess such special 
         qualities, they may also be perfectly balanced and do even more damage.

     What Happens When You Hit a Monster:
         Here, throwing and melee are broadly similar, with four differences:  
         Firstly, throwing weapons have a damage multiplier, which increases as 
         you gain experience levels (it ranges from 2 to 6, or 4 to 12 with 
         perfectly balanced weapons).  Secondly, no thrown object other than 
         the special throwing weapons may take advantage of bonuses to Skill or 
         Deadliness granted by your equipment.  Thirdly, only throwing weapons 
         can get critical hits when thrown.  Finally, thrown objects may break, 
         but throwing weapons only do so rarely.


-- Using Magical Devices --

     Wands, staffs, and rods are an important part of many adventurers's 
arsenals, and are critical for mages.  The lower-level items are quite easy to
use, the higher-level items can do quite a bit of damage, but they take up a
lot of space in your backpack.  In addition to these items, certain rare rings 
can be 'A'ctivated and there are rumors of armors and artifacts that can unleash 
enormous destruction.
     Mages are the masters of magical items.  Not merely can they use them with
greater confidence than anyone else, but they can eventually use them faster and
recharge them more safely.
     If you use wands and staffs, keep your eyes open for scrolls of recharging.
Be warned, recharging is not a sure deal...  Also, keep stopping by the Black
Market; since some items are most useful in quantity, this store will occasion-
ally sell three or four such objects at a time.  At present, there is one kind  
of equipment item that can increase magical items skill.


-- Spells and Prayers --

     All classes but Warriors can learn spells or prayers, and the pure spell-
casters (mages, priests, druids, and necromancers) possess quite significant 
powers, even though many of the most unbalancing Angband spells have taken a 
cost or usefulness hit.  There are four magical realms available, and each has 
a synposis of its own in the help file on character birth.
     In Oangband, it is far easier to confuse, slow, frighten, turn, or sleep 
most monsters, and many creatures (including uniques) are now newly vulnerable.  With skill and patience, you can badly hinder even formidable opponents.  On 
the other hand, many monster races have at least one intrinsic immunity, high-
level monsters are still very difficult to reduce, all attacks of this type are 
chancy, and the monster AI is capable of dealing with at least some of your new 
tricks.

     Note that you may see your bolts wizz about and your balls explode in vivid 
color by setting the "delay factor", found in options, to (for most machines) 
between two and four.


=== Defending Against Attacks ===

     Monsters have all sorts of ways to hinder, damage, reduce, annoy, or even 
kill your character.  As you move down deeper into the dungeon in search of 
better items, you will need to steadily improve your defences against pure
damage, wounds, cuts, and stunning, bolts, balls, and breaths of various kinds, 
reductions of exp and stats, theft, and a variety of miscellanious magical 
attacks.


-- Pure Damage --

     Virtually all monsters can lower your hit points, and if you lose too many, 
you die.  Fortunately, this is also the attack most easily guarded against.  
Your armor class (or AC) is a number that describes the amount and the quality 
of the armor you are wearing.  The higher your armor class, the less likely you 
are to be hit by any melee blow, and the fewer HPs any sucessful standard hit will cost you.  Armour class has no effect on magical attacks.

     Your Armor:
              Each piece of armour has a base armor value, which, like the 
         damage from weapons, is assumed to be known by the player, and possibly 
         a magical bonus, which will not be displayed unless the armor has been 
         identified.  Add the two together, and you have the total protective 
         value of the item; for example, a Chain Mail (-2) [14, +6] increases 
         your armor class by 20.  Note the "(-2)".  It is a penalty to Skill.  
              Above a certain weight limit, all spellcasters lose mana for 
         wearing heavy armor, although the penalty falls less heavily on 
         Priests, less still on Rogues, Rangers, and Assassins, and least on 
         Paladins.  Unlike in Angband, this penalty is as important for high-
         level characters as it was when they first started adventuring.  In 
         addition, Mages and Necromancers lose a chunk of mana if they wear 
         gloves that do not provide free action.


-- Cuts, Poison, and Stunning --

     Many monsters can inflict special kinds of physical damage on you, such as
opening wounds, and poisoning or stunning you.  After you start earning a little
money, plow some of it back into potions of cure Serious and Critical Wounds, 
and keep one or the other handy at all times.  If a monster manages to Heavy 
Stun you, teleport away!


-- Bolt, Ball, and Breath attacks --

     Just as spellcasters can do damage to monsters using many different kinds 
of magic, so too can monsters get some of their own back.  In the course of a
complete game, you will face roughly a score of different ranged attack types, 
only a few of which you cannot resist.

     Fire, Acid, Electricity, and Cold are the basic elemental attacks.  Before
you descend below 2000', be wearing items that protect against all four, because 
the maximum damage they can do to you is very high.  Unlike with other attack 
types, you can resist, double resist, and be immune to the elements.  If you 
wear two pieces of armor with resist fire, you will not have double resistance 
to fire.  If you are wearing one (or more) pieces of armor that resist fire and 
have also cast a spell, quaffed a potion, or otherwise gained temporary fire 
resistance, you have temporary double resistance.  Immunity to any of the ele-
ments is hard to get.
     Poison is deadly, and not so easy to gain resistance to.  You are 
tempting fate if you wander much below 2400' without it.  You can double-resist
poison.
     Darkness, Light, Shards, and Sound can be moderately dangerous if unresis-
ted, but monsters that breath any of them powerfully are rare enough that you 
can concentrate on more urgent issues.  Keep a eye open, though...
     A fair number of creatures breath Nether, but you don't have to have it 
covered until roughly 2750'.
     Chaos is deadly.  Don't cruise below 3500' without it covered.

     Be warned:  Some kinds of attacks cannot be resisted!  Fortunately, they
have low damage limits.


-- Reductions of Experience and Stats --

    Even when your character is starting out, there are rare traps and monsters 
capable of lowering his stats and draining his exp.  In addition, a strong 
elemental attack can occasionally lower a stat.  Slowly, these dangers increase,
until, below 2750' for exp loss and 4500' for stat loss, it becomes very 
important that you find objects that provide hold life and sustain at least 
your critical stats.  Until you get to the abyssal depths, though, these attacks
aren't too bad, because you can quaff a potion of Restore Life or restore a stat
(you will not infrequently find all of these in town) when the loss become too 
serious to ignore.


-- Theft --

     Nobody is more annoying than a thief.  You've just found that cool spell-
book or nifty weapon, and now it's gone.  You can gain a significent degree of 
protection from theft by increasing Dexerity, and can always collect your stuff 
from the thief's corpse.  Unfortunately, thieves are smart enough to stash away 
the money they take from you.


-- Miscellanious magical attacks --

     There are many monsters capable of casting spells to blind, confuse, slow, 
and paralyse you, plus quite a few other nasty tricks I will not mention.  Find
some objects that give you Free Action and See Invisible somewhere between 1500' 
and 2000'.  Your Saving throw protects against these and other attacks, and you
can raise this survival skill by increasing Wisdom.

It is rumoured that certain undead possess a very deadly touch...
The same rumors whisper that Athelas has remarkable curative properties...


=== Ego-Weapons ===

     Some rare weapons have special abilities.  These are called ego weapons, 
and are feared by great and meek.  The help file on character birth, has a 
section called "Special qualities and Immunities that your Character may 
Possess" with more information about some of the abilities mentioned below.

--- Melee Weapons ---

Holy Avenger:
     Among the most powerful weapons in the dungeon, and the great friend of 
     Priests and Paladins, a Holy Avenger will increase your wisdom and armour 
     class, is always blessed (so pious characters may wield even a sword or 
     polearm without penalty), slays evil, demons, and the undead, allows you 
     to see the unseen, and will sustain a random stat.

Defender:
     Strong companion in peril, a Defender weapon improves your stealth and 
     armour class.  It grants see invisible, feather falling, free action, 
     regeneration, and resistance to fire, frost, acid, and electricity.  It 
     sustains a random stat.

Blessed Blade:
     A priest or paladin may wield a blessed blade of any type without penalty, 
     and greatly appreciate the bonus to wisdom it provides.  These weapons also 
     have one extra random power.

Weapon of Westernesse:
     Made by the Dunadain of old, these weapons are the bane of orcs, trolls, 
     and giants.  They grant see invisible and free action, and offer a bonus 
     to the fighting stats.

Elemental Branded Weapons, and Weapons of Poison:
     Each of the four elemental attacks has a corresponding weapon which will 
     do double damage against creatures not resistant to that element.  These 
     weapons are labelled "of Melting", "of Shocking", "of Burning", "of 
     Freezing" and "of Poisoning", corresponding to acid, lightning, fire, cold,
     and poison.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Animal:
     A Slay Animal weapon is a special purpose weapon whose sole intent is
     to destroy all the dangerous natural creatures in the world.  They do 1.7x 
     damage against such monsters.  Some powerful weapons of this type not only 
     do double damage against animals, but also increase intelligence and rege-
     neration speed.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Evil:
     A Slay Evil weapon does 1.5x damage against the many evil creatures that 
     inhabit the dungeons.  Some powerful weapons of this type do 1.7x damage, 
     are blessed blades, and increase wisdom.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Undead:
     These weapons do double damage against the undead.  Some powerful weapons 
     of this type do 2.5x damage, increase wisdom, and grant see invisible.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Demon:
     These weapons do double damage against demons.  Some powerful weapons of 
     this type do 2.5x damage and increase intelligence.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Orc:
     These weapons do double damage against orcs.  Some powerful weapons of 
     this type do 2.5x damage and increase dexerity.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Troll:
     These weapons do double damage against trolls.  Some powerful weapons of 
     this type do 2.5x damage and increase strength.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Giant:
     These weapons do double damage against giants.  Some powerful weapons of 
     this type do 2.5x damage and increase strength.

Weapons of Slay and *Slay* Dragon:
     These weapons do double damage against dragons.  Some powerful weapons of 
     this type do 2.5x damage and increase constitution.

Perfectly Balanced weapons:
     Any throwing weapon, if also an ego weapon, may display a name such as 
     "A Balanced Spear of Slay Evil".  Such weapons can be thrown hard and fast.

Weapons of Digging:
     Shovels and Picks may sometimes possess such high bonuses to tunnelling 
     skill that they merit this name. 

Weapons of Morgul.
     These blades are so foully cursed with evil that it is rumored that it is
     very difficult to remove them.  Beware!


--- Missile Weapons and Ammo ---

Launchers of Accuracy.
     These launchers have an unnaturally high Skill bonus, making them extremely 
     accurate.

Launchers of Velocity.
     These launchers do an unnaturally high amount of damage due to their high 
     Deadliness bonus.

Launchers of Extra Shots.
     These launchers allow the wielder to shoot more rapidly than normal.

Launchers of Extra Might.
     These launchers have a higher damage multiplier than normally made items 
     of their type.  Most increase the multiplier by one, and some by two.

Ammo of Hurt Animal.
    This ammo does x1.7 damage against natural denizens of the dungeon.

Ammo of Hurt Evil.
    This ammo does x1.5 damage against evil creatures in the dungeon.

Ammo of Hurt Dragon.
    This ammo does double damage against dragons.

Ammo of Flame.
    This ammo does double damage against creatures not resistant to fire.

Ammo of Frost.
    This ammo does double damage against creatures not resistant to cold.

Ammo of Acid
    This ammo does double damage against creatures not resistant to acid.

Ammo of Electricity
    This ammo does double damage against creatures not resistant to electricity.

Ammo of Poison
    This ammo does double damage against creatures not resistant to poison.

Ammo of Wounding.
    This ammo boosts the Skill and Deadliness numbers of the shooter.

--- Other special weapons ---

     Any melee weapon or ammo may have unusually high numbers of sides to its 
damage dice.  Combine this with powerful magics, and you have a mighty combat 
tool indeed.

     Apart from these there are some very rare and well made items in the
dungeon. These include Blades of Chaos, Maces of Disruption, and Scythes of 
Slicing.  They can also be ego weapons.  For example, a Blade of Chaos (Holy 
Avenger) is a potentially game-winning weapon.

There are rumors of rare, unique artifact weapons which are even more powerful 
than ego weapons.  While some artifact weapons are standard, and you may already 
know of their fame, others will certainly be unfamiliar to you and will need to 
be fully identified (*identified*).


=== Ego-Armours ===

Armours and Shields:

of Resist Acid.
     A character using such an object will take only one third normal damage
     from any acid thrown upon him.  In addition, armor so enchanted will
     resist the acid's effects and not be damaged by it.
 
of Resist Lightning.
     A character using a resist lightning object will take only one third
     damage from electrical attacks.
 
of Resist Fire.
     A character using a resist fire object will take only one third damage
     from heat and fire.
 
of Resist Cold.
     A character using a resist cold object will take only one third damage
     from frost and cold.
 
of Resistance.
     A character wearing armor with this ability will have resistance to
     Acid, Cold, Fire, and Lightning as explained in each part above.
 
of Elvenkind.
     This is the same as Resistance armour, only generally better enchanted.
     It will make you more stealthy.  This armor can also possess an extra 
     resistances beyond the four basic elemental ones.
 
Shields of Night and Day.
     These provide protection from light and darkness attacks.

Robes of Permanence.
     These robes are designed especially for wizards.  Just like Elvenkind
     armor, they provide resistance to fire, cold, acid, and electricity and
     cannot be damaged by acid.  They sustain all of your stats and protect
     you from a good deal of all experience draining.  Also like Elvenkind
     armor, they can have additional special resistances.  These robes are
     so good that their owners are rarely killed, perhaps explaining the
     incredible rarity.

Dragon Scale Mails.
     These extremely rare pieces of armour come in many different colors,
     each protecting you against the relevent dragons.  Naturally they are
     all resistant to acid damage.  They also occasionally allow you to
     breathe as a dragon would!

Ego Helms:
----------
Stat Boosting Helms.
     There are magical helms found in the dungeon that have the ability
     to boost the wearer's intelligence, wisdom, or charisma.  Helms of 
     Beauty are the ones that boost charisma.  In addition to boosting 
     the relevant stat these helms will also prevent that stat from being 
     drained.

Helm of the Magi.
     This is the great helm of the wizards.  The wearer will have an
     increased (and sustained) intelligence, and will also be given 
     resistance against fire, frost, acid, and lightning.  These valuable
     helms may also have additional properties.

Helm of Might.
     This is the great helm of the warriors.  The wearer will have an
     increased and sustained strength, dexterity, and constitution, 
     and will also be immune to any foe's attempt to slow or paralyze 
     him or her.

Helm of Lordliness.
     This is the great helm of the paladins.  The wearer will have an
     increased and sustained wisdom and charisma.

Helm of Seeing.
     This is the great helm of the rogues.  The wearer will be able to see
     even invisible creatures, and will have an increased ability to locate
     traps and secret doors.  It is also rumored that the wearer of such a
     helm will not be able to be blinded.

Helm of Tranquillity.
     Offers protection from confusion and sound.

Helm of Light.
     In addition to providing a permanent light source for the wearer, this 
     helm also provides resistance against light-based attacks.

Helm of Telepathy.
     This helm grants the wearer the power of telepathy.

Helm of Regeneration.
     This helm will help you regenerate hit points and mana more quickly
     than normal, allowing you to fight longer before needing to rest.  You
     will use food faster than normal while wearing this helm because of
     the regenerative effects.
 
Ego Cloaks:
-----------
Cloak of Protection.
     This finely made cloak will come with an unnaturally high enchantment
     and is not affected by elemental based attacks.

Cloak of Stealth.
     This cloak will increase the wearer's stealth, making the wearer less
     likely to wake up sleeping monsters.

Cloak of Aman.
     These exceptionally rare cloaks combine the properties of Cloaks of
     Protection and Cloaks of Stealth, and are rumored to have properties
     beyond even those!

Cloaks of Shard Protection
     These protect against shard blasts.

Ego Gloves:
-----------
Gloves of Free Action.
     The wearer of these gloves will find himself resistant to paralyzing
     attacks as well as some slowing attacks.  Because of the special 
     nature of these gloves, necromantic and sorcery magic users may wear 
     these gloves without incurring a mana penalty.   

Gloves of Slaying.
     These gloves will increase the wearer's fighting ability by boosting
     the wearer's Skill and Deadliness values.

Gloves of Agility.
     These gloves will increase the wearer's dexterity.

Gloves of Power.
     These gloves will boost the wearer's strength as well as the wearer's
     Skill and Deadliness numbers.

Ego Boots:
----------
Boots of Slow Descent.
     These boots protect the wearer from the effects of small falls.

Boots of Stealth.
     These boots increase the wearer's stealth, like a Cloak of Stealth.

Boots of Free Action.
     The wearer of these boots will find himself resistant to paralyzing
     attacks as well as some slowing attacks.

Boots of Stability
     These boots protect against nexus and certain forms of involuntary movement.

Boots of Speed.
     The wearer of these boots will become unnaturally quick!

Apart from these there are some very rare, and well made armours in the
dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These include Shields of
Deflection, Adamantite Plate Mail, Mithril Plate Mail, Mithril Chain Mail,
and Shadow Cloaks.  The first four cannot be damaged by acid because of the
quality metals they contain.

There are rumors of incredibly rare "artifact" armours which are even more 
powerful than ego armour.  Some artifact weapons are standard, and you may 
already know of their fame, while others will certainly be unfamiliar to you 
and will need to be fully identified (*identified*).


=== Monster Memories ===

There are hundreds of different creatures in the pits of Angband, many of
which have the same letter symbol and color on the screen.  The exact species
of a creature can be discovered by looking at it.  It is also very difficult
to keep track of the capabilities of various creatures.  Luckily, Angband
automatically keeps track of your experiences with a particular creature.
This feature is called the monster memory.  You monster memory recalls the
particular attacks of each creature (whether or not technically a monster)
which you have suffered, as well as recalling if you have observed them to
multiply or move erratically, or drop treasure, etc.  Otherwise you would
simply have to take notes, which is an unnecessary bother.

If you have killed enough of a particular creature, or suffered enough
attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you with information
not otherwise available, such as a armor class or hit dice.  These are not
explained, but may be useful to give the relative danger of each creature.
This memory can be passed on to a new character even after you die by means
of a reduced save file.


=== How to Steal and Set Traps ===

     Only Rogues may steal and set traps.  If you type the alter command ('+' in 
either keyset), enter a direction and target a visible monster, you will attempt 
to steal.  If you target a totally bare floor square, you will set a monster 
trap.
     Stealing is lucrative but risky.  All monsters that drop anything will have 
at least some treasure on them.  Humans, humanoids, and dragons are the juiciest 
targets, and most other smart bipedal creatures are fairly well-off too; the 
higher the monster level, the larger the purse.  Uniques are especially rich.  
High-level monsters and other thieves are harder to steal from, but sleeping 
monsters are easier.  But burglary is not all fun and games.  Every time you 
steal on a level, the monsters get warier.  Steal too often, and you may very 
quickly get hunted down.
     Monster traps are trivial to set and disarm.  They do a reasonable amount 
of damage, increasing with player level and monster HPs, but seldom kill a 
monster of any power outright.  Traps may be disarmed or flown over.  Only one 
monster trap may exist on a level at any one time, so disarm an old trap to use 
your trap gear elsewhere.  If your trap is buried in rubble, you will not be 
able to make any more on that level.


=== Listing of Druid Blows and their Damage Potential ===

Name        number of dice, sides to each die

"punch",                 1, 4
"kick",                  2, 3
"knee",                  1,10
"chop",                  2, 6
"uppercut",              3, 5
"boot",                  3, 8
"bang on",               5, 5
"slam",                  4, 9
"grapple with",         12, 3
"hammer",                9, 6
"head butt",             3,24
"strangle",              8,10
"roundhouse kick",       5,19
"assault",              10,11
"crush",                11,11
"double-kick",          21, 6
"thunderclap belt",      8,19
"blizzard gouge",       14,11
"tsunami whirl",         7,26
"stormwind chop",       10,22
