=== The commands available to you, and their descriptions ===

     This file lists the direction keys, the standard set of commands, then the 
alternative set for those used to roguelike commands.  Next, command counts and
object selection are briefly described, followed by full descriptions of all 
commands.  This file has been changed and added to for Oangband 0.3.1.
     The help file on getting more out of the game has information on how to get 
more use out of commands, speed up commonly used tasks, and a more detailed 
treatment of command modifiers.


=== Keys for moving around and choosing a direction ===

        Original Keyset Directions       Roguelike Keyset Directions

                 7  8  9                           y  k  u
                 4     6                           h     l
                 1  2  3                           b  j  n


=== Original Keyset Command Summary ===

 a  Aim a wand                           A  Activate an artifact
 b  Browse a book                        B  Bash a door
 c  Close a door                         C  Character description
 d  Drop an item                         D  Disarm a trap
 e  Equipment list                       E  Eat some food
 f  Fire an item                         F  Fuel your lantern/torch
 g  Get object on floor                  G  Gain new spells/prayers
 h  (unused)                             H  (unused)
 i  Inventory list                       I  Observe an item
 j  Jam a door                           J  (unused)
 k  Destroy an item                      K  (unused)
 l  Look around                          L  Locate player on map
 m  Cast a spell                         M  Full dungeon map
 n  (unused)                             N  (unused)
 o  Open a door or chest                 O  (unused)
 p  Pray a prayer                        P  (unused)
 q  Quaff a potion                       Q  Quit (commit suicide)
 r  Read a scroll                        R  Rest for a period
 s  Search for traps/doors               S  Toggle search mode
 t  Take off equipment                   T  Dig a tunnel
 u  Use a staff                          U  (unused)
 v  Throw an item                        V  Version info
 w  Wear/wield equipment                 W  (unused)
 x  (unused - easy rest macro)           X  (unused - switch weapon macro)
 y  (unused)                             Y  (unused)
 z  Zap a rod                            Z  (unused)
 !  Interact with system                ^A  (special - debug command)
 @  Interact with macros                ^B  (unused)
 #  (unused)                            ^C  (special - break)
 $  User interface                      ^D  (unused)
 %  Interact with visuals               ^E  Toggle choice window
 ^  (special - control key)             ^F  Repeat level feeling
 &  Interact with colors                ^G  (unused)
 *  Target monster or location          ^H  (unused)
 (  Load screen dump                    ^I  (special - tab)
 )  Dump screen dump                    ^J  (special - linefeed)
 {  Inscribe an object                  ^K  (unused)
 }  Uninscribe an object                ^L  (unused)
 [  (unused)                            ^M  (special - return)
 ]  end shapechange                     ^N  (unused)
 -  Walk (flip pickup)                  ^O  (unused)
 _  Enter store                         ^P  Show previous messages
 +  Alter grid*                         ^Q  (unused)
 =  Set options                         ^R  Redraw the screen
 ;  Walk (with pickup)                  ^S  Save and don't quit
 :  Take notes                          ^T  (unused)
 '  (unused)                            ^U  (unused)
 "  Enter a user pref command           ^V  (unused)
 ,  Stay still (with pickup)            ^W  (special - wizard mode)
 <  Go up staircase                     ^X  Save and quit
 .  Run                                 ^Y  (unused)
 >  Go down staircase                   ^Z  (special - borg command)
 \  (special - bypass keymap)            |  (unused)
 `  (special - escape)                   ~  Check knowledge
 /  Identify symbol                      ?  Help

* NOTE:  For Rogues, this command also sets traps and steals.


=== Roguelike Keyset Command Summary ===

 a  Zap a rod (Activate)                 A  Activate an artifact
 b  (walk - south west)                  B  (run - south west)
 c  Close a door                         C  Character description
 d  Drop an item                         D  Disarm a trap or chest
 e  Equipment list                       E  Eat some food
 f  Bash a door (force)                  F  Fuel your lantern/torch
 g  Get object on floor                  G  Gain new spells/prayers
 h  (walk - west)                        H  (run - west)
 i  Inventory list                       I  Observe an item
 j  (walk - south)                       J  (run - south)
 k  (walk - north)                       K  (run - north)
 l  (walk - east)                        L  (run - east)
 m  Cast a spell                         M  Full dungeon map
 n  (walk - south east)                  N  (run - south east)
 o  Open a door or chest                 O  (unused)
 p  Pray a prayer                        P  Browse a book
 q  Quaff a potion                       Q  Quit (commit suicide)
 r  Read a scroll                        R  Rest for a period
 s  Search for traps/doors               S  Jam a door (Spike)
 t  Fire an item                         T  Take off equipment
 u  (walk - north east)                  U  (run - north east)
 v  Throw an item                        V  Version info
 w  Wear/wield equipment                 W  Locate player on map (Where)
 x  Look around                          X  (unused - switch weapon macro)
 y  (walk - north west)                  Y  (run - north west)
 z  Aim a wand (Zap)                     Z  Use a staff (Zap)
 !  Interact with system                ^A  (special - debug command)
 @  Interact with macros                ^B  (alter - south west)
 #  Toggle search mode                  ^C  (special - break)
 $  (unused)                            ^D  Destroy item
 %  Interact with visuals               ^E  Toggle choice window
 ^  (special - control key)             ^F  Repeat level feeling
 &  Interact with colors                ^G  (unused)
 *  Target monster or location          ^H  (alter - west)
 (  Load screen dump                    ^I  (special - tab)
 )  Dump screen dump                    ^J  (alter - south)
 {  Inscribe an object                  ^K  (alter - north)
 }  Uninscribe an object                ^L  (alter - east)
 [  (unused)                            ^M  (special - return)
 ]  end shapechange                     ^N  (alter - south east)
 -  Walk (flip pickup)                  ^O  (unused)
 _  Enter store                         ^P  Show previous messages
 +  Alter grid*                         ^Q  (unused)
 =  Set options                         ^R  Redraw the screen
 ;  Walk (with pickup)                  ^S  Save and don't quit
 :  Take notes                          ^T  Dig a Tunnel
 '  (unused)                            ^U  (alter - north east)
 "  Enter a user pref command           ^V  Examine current target
 ,  Run                                 ^W  (special - wizard mode)
 <  Go up staircase                     ^X  Save and quit
 .  Stay still (with pickup)            ^Y  (alter - north west)
 >  Go down staircase                   ^Z  (special - borg command)
 \  (special - bypass keymap)            |  (unused)
 `  (special - escape)                   ~  Check knowledge
 /  Identify symbol                      ?  Help

* NOTE:  For Rogues, this command also sets traps and steals.


=== Basic Command Information ===

Cancelling a Command:
     Virtually all commands can be cancelled at any point before execution by 
hitting the ESC key.

Command Directions:
     If you issue a command that requires a direction, you will be prompted for
one.  Simply type the appropriate direction key, and the command will activate.

Selecting an Object:
     Angband has an extremely easy-to-use interface for selecting objects in
your backpack (your inventory), on your person (your equipment), or on the floor 
underneath you.  If you issue a command that uses or manipulates any item, you 
can hit the spacebar or type "*" to see a list of all the objects that command 
can accept.  If the command can accept objects both on your person and in your
backpack, you can hit '/' to cycle between the two.  If an object that the com-
mand can accept is lying on the floor underneath your feet, you can type "_" to
use that item.  You then select the exect item by typing its index letter; if 
you want to play it safe, and get a "are you sure" message, type the letter in 
uppercase.
     Spellcasting works very similarly.  You type 'm' or 'p', select a book, and
select a spell within that book.  You can even use books on the floor.

Choosing Quantities:
     If you issue a command that might logically use more than one object, and
more than one object is available, you will be prompted for a quantity.  Try 
'd'ropping your torches as an example.

How to Rest:
     So often will the baddies you face inflict damage on you that you will 
spend a great deal of time recovering.  To rest, type 'R'.  A list of options
will appear; conveniently, the most commonly-used option is already selected, 
so you can simply hit return.  Oangband reduces wrist strain for users of the
original command set even more by providing an Easy Rest command 'x'.  Use it
whenever you like, especially while wounded and waiting for a foe to reach you.

Targetting:
     The target command ("*") makes it possible to set up a location or fix a 
monster as the point which you want future missiles and spells to aim for.
Some other commands use the targetting interface, including all those that 
fire magic or ammo, or look around the dungeon.
     After you have typed "*", you have a number of options available to you,
including 'r'ecalling information about the monster the cursor is on, 
't'argetting that monster or location, and hitting 'o' to start moving the 
cursor around one square at a time (useful for exact movement).

Command Counts:
     Any command that can be repeated or that can manipulate more than one
object can take a count.  By default, most that do are automatically given a 
count of 99 (you may change this in the options if you like).  Although most 
commands that usually need a quantity will ask for one, for other commands a 
quantity is only sometimes desired.  Hence command counts.  For example, to 
tunnel into a wall exactly 50 times, you would type a zero ("0"), then "50", 
followed by a return.  Then, type "T" (or ^T).  All commands that use quan-
tities will stop if you are disturbed, accomplish your intended task, hit any 
key, or when the count expires.

Neat Angband features:
     In the help file on getting more out of the game are sections on inscribing
objects and making keymaps to:
-quickly switch to a shovel or backup weapon, 
-fire a missile or cast commonly used spells with a single keystroke, and 
-prevent accidental use of valuable equipment


=== Command Descriptions ===

        The following command descriptions are listed as the command name
plus the key used to activate it in the original keyset.  This is followed 
by the "roguelike" keyset key, if different from the original command key.
Then comes a brief description of the command, including information about
alternative methods of specifying the command in each keyset, when needed.

        Some commands use the "repeat count" to automatically repeat the
command several times, while others use the "repeat count" to specify a
"quantity" for the command, and still others use it as an "argument" of
some kind.  Some commands are auto-repeated several times if no repeat
count is given and the "always_repeat" option is set (which it is by default).

        Most commands take no "energy" to perform, while most other commands
only take energy when they cause the world to change in some way.

--- Inventory Commands ---

Inventory list (i)
        Displays a list of objects being carried but not equipped.  You
        can carry up to 23 different items, not counting those in your
        equipment.  Often, many identical objects can be "stacked" into
        a "pile" which will count as a single item.  This is always
        true of things like potions, scrolls, and food, but you may have
        to set options to allow wands, staves, and other such objects to
        stack.  Each object has a weight, and if you carry more objects
        than your strength permits, you will begin to slow down.
 
Equipment list (e)
        Use this command to display a list of the objects currently being
        used by your character.  Your character has 12 slots for equipment,
        each corresponding to a different location on the body, and each of
        which may contain only a single object at a time, and each of which
        may only contain objects of the proper "type", and which include
        WIELD (weapon), BOW (missile launcher), LEFT (ring), RIGHT (ring),
        NECK (amulet), LITE (light source), BODY (armor), OUTER (cloak),
        ARM (shield), HEAD (helmet), HANDS (gloves), FEET (boots).  You
        must be wielding/wearing certain objects to take advantage of
        their special powers.

Drop an item (d)
        This drops an item from your inventory or equipment onto the
        dungeon floor.  If the floor spot you are standing on already has
        an object in it, Angband will attempt to drop the item onto an
        adjacent space.  Be warned that if the floor is full and you
        attempt to drop something, it may disappear and be destroyed.
        Doors and traps are considered objects for the purpose of
        determining if the space is occupied.  This command may take
        a quantity, and takes some energy.

Destroy an item (k) or Destroy an item (^D)
        This destroys an item in your inventory or on the dungeon floor.
        If the selected pile contains multiple objects, you may specify
        a quantity.  You must always (currently) verify this command.
        This command may take a quantity, and takes some energy.

Wear/Wield equipment (w)
        To wear or wield an object in your inventory, use this command.
        Since only one object can be in each slot at a time, if you wear
        or wield an item into a slot which is already occupied, the old
        item will be first be taken off, and may in fact be dropped if
        there is no room for it in your inventory.  This command takes
        some energy.

Take off equipment (t) or Take off equipment (T)
        Use this command to take off a piece of equipment and return it
        to your inventory.  Occasionally, you will run into a cursed item
        which cannot be removed.  These items normally penalize you in some
        way and cannot be taken off until the curse is removed.  If there
        is no room in your inventory for the item, your pack will overflow
        and you will drop the item after taking it off.  This command takes
        some energy.

Switch primary and secondary weapon (X)
        Actually a macro, this command exchanges whatever weapon you have
        wielded with the first weapon in your inventory inscribed {@0}.

--- Movement Commands ---

Walk (with pickup) (;)
        Moves one step in the given direction.  The square you are moving
        into must not be blocked by walls or doors.  You will pick up any
        items in the destination grid if the "always_pickup" option is set,
        or if the "query_pickup" option is set and you respond correctly.
        You may also use the "original" direction keys (both keysets) or
        the "roguelike" direction keys (roguelike keyset) to walk in a
        direction.  This command may take a count, requires a direction,
        and takes some energy.

Walk (flip pickup) (-)
        This is just like normal move, except that the "Pick things up"
        option is inverted.  In other words, if you normally pick up
        anything you encounter (the default), you will not pick things up
        when using this command.  If you normally do not pick things up,
        you will when using this command.  This command may take a count,
        requires a direction, and takes some energy.

Run (.) or Run (,)
        This command will move in the given direction, following any bends
        in the corridor, until you either have to make a "choice" between
        two directions or you are disturbed.  You can configure what will
        disturb you by setting the disturbance options.  You may also use
        shift plus the "roguelike" direction keys (roguelike keyset), or
        shift plus the "original" direction keys on the keypad (both keysets,
        some machines) to run in a direction.  This command may take an
        argument, requires a direction, and takes some energy.

Go up staircase (<)
        Climbs up an up staircase you are standing on.  There is always at
        least one staircase going up on every level except for the town
        level (this doesn't mean it's easy to find).  Going up a staircase
        will take you to a new dungeon level unless you are at 50 feet
        (dungeon level 1), in which case you will return to the town
        level.  Note that whenever you leave a level (not the town), you
        will never find it again.  This means that for all intents and
        purposes, any objects on that level are destroyed.  This includes
        artifacts unless the "Create characters in preserve mode" option
        was set when your character was created, in which case the artifacts
        may show up again later.  This command takes some energy.

Go down staircase (>)
        Descends a down staircase you are standing on.  There are always
        at least two staircases going down on each level, except for the
        town which has only one, and "quest" levels, which have none until
        the quest monster is killed.  Going down a staircase will take you
        to a new dungeon level.  See "Go Up Staircase" for more info.
        This command takes some energy.

--- Resting Commands ---

Stay still (with pickup) (,) or Stay still (with pickup) (.)
        Stays in the same square for one move.  If you normally pick up
        objects you encounter, you will pick up whatever you are standing
        on.  You may also use the "5" key (both keysets).  This command
        may take a count, and takes some energy.

Stay still (flip pickup) (g)
        If the "always_pickup" option is turned on, stay in the same square 
        for one move.  Otherwise, take only a partial turn, and pick up 
        objects underneath you.  This command may take a count.

Rest (R)
        You recover from wounds twice as fast by resting than by repeatedly 
        staying still.  This command can be told to automatically stop after 
        a certain amount of time, or when various conditions are met.  In 
        either case, you always wake up when anything disturbing happens, or 
        when you press any key.  After typing 'R', use "*" to rest until 
        your hitpoints and mana are restored, and "&" to rest until you are 
        fully "healed".  This command may take an argument (used for the 
        number of turns to rest), and takes some energy.

Easy Rest (x)   (not available in the roguelike keyset)
        Actually a macro, this command automatically makes you rest until
        your HPs and mana are restored or you are disturbed.  Oangband in-
        cluded it to cut down on wrist stress and allow more effective
        waiting.

--- Searching Commands ---

Search (s)
        This command can be used to locate hidden traps and secret doors
        in the spaces adjacent to the player.  More than a single turn of
        searching will be required in most cases.  You should always
        search a chest before trying to open it, since they are generally
        trapped.  This command can take a count, which is useful if you
        are fairly sure of finding something eventually, since the command
        stops as soon as anything is found.  This command may take a count,
        and takes some energy.

Toggle search mode (S) or Toggle search mode (#)
        This command will take you into and out of search mode.  When
        first pressed, the message "Searching" will appear at the bottom
        of the screen.  You are now taking two turns for each command, one
        for the command and one turn to search.  This means that you are
        taking twice the time to move around the dungeon, and therefore
        twice the food.  Search mode will automatically turn off if you
        are disturbed.  You may also turn off search mode by entering the
        Search Mode command again.

--- Alter Commands ---

Tunnel (T) or Tunnel (^T)
        Tunneling or mining is a very useful art.  There are many kinds of
        rock, with varying hardness, including permanent rock (permanent),
        granite (very hard), quartz veins (hard), magma veins (soft), and
        rubble (very soft).  Quartz and Magma veins may be displayed in a
        special way, and may sometimes contain treasure, in which case they
        will be displayed in a different way.  Rubble sometimes covers an
        object.  It is hard to tunnel unless you are wielding a heavy weapon
        or a shovel or a pick.  Tunneling ability increases with strength
        and weapon weight.  This command may take a count, is affected by
        the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some
        energy.

Open a door or chest (o)
        If the option to open doors automatically is off, or more than one 
        door or chest can be opened at the moment, you must use this command 
        to open anything.  If the object is locked, you will attempt to pick 
        the lock based on your disarming ability.  If you open a trapped 
        chest without disarming the traps first, they will activate.  Some 
        doors will be jammed shut and may have to be forced open.  You may 
        need several tries to open a door or chest.  This command may take 
        a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a 
        direction, and takes some energy.

Close a door (c)
        Non-intelligent and some other creatures cannot open doors, so
        shutting doors can be quite valuable.  Broken doors cannot be closed.
        Bashing a door open may break it.  This command may take a count,
        is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and 
        takes some energy.

Jam a door (j) or Spike a door (S)
        Many monsters can simply open closed doors, and can eventually 
        get through a locked door.  You may therefore occasionally want 
        to jam a door shut with iron spikes.  Each spike used on the door 
        will make it harder to bash down the door, up to a certain limit.
        Smaller monsters are less able to bash down doors.  In order to 
        use this command, you must be carrying iron spikes.  This command 
        requires a direction, and takes some energy.

Bash a door (B) or Force a door (f)
        This command allows you to bash down jammed doors.  Your bashing
        ability increases with strength.  Bashing open a door can (briefly)
        throw you off balance.  Doors that are stuck, or which have been
        jammed closed with spikes can only be opened by bashing, and all
        closed doors can be bashed open if desired.  Bashing a door open
        may permanently break it so that it can never be closed.  This
        command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option,
        requires a direction, and takes some energy.

Disarm a trap or chest (D)
        You can attempt to disarm traps on the floor or on chests.  If you
        fail, there is a chance that you will blunder and set it off.  You
        can only disarm a trap after you have found it (usually with the
        Search command).  This command may take a count, is affected by the
        "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.

Alter (+)
        This special command allows the use of a single keypress to select
        any of the "obvious" commands above (attack, tunnel, bash, open,
        disarm, close), and, by using macros or keymaps, to combine this
        keypress with directions.  For Rogues, it also allows stealing and
        setting traps.  See the help document on attacking and defending.
        In general, this allows the use of the "control" key plus the 
        appropriate "direction" key (including the roguelike direction keys 
        in roguelike mode) as a kind of generic "alter the terrain feature 
        of an adjacent grid" command.  This command may take a count, is 
        affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and 
        takes some energy.

--- Spell and Prayer Commands ---

Browse a book (b) or Peruse a book (P)
        Mages, rogues, druids, rangers, necromancers, and assassins can read 
        magic books, and priests and paladins can read prayer books.  Warriors 
        cannot read any books.  When this command is used, all of the spells 
        or prayers contained in the selected book are displayed, along with 
        information such as their level, the amount of mana required to cast 
        them, their damage, duration, or healing power, and whether or not you 
        know the spell or prayer.

Gain new spells or prayers (G)
        Use this command to actually learn new spells or prayers.  When you
        are able to learn new spells or prayers, the word "Study" will appear
        on the status line at the bottom of the screen.  If you have a book
        in your possession, containing spells or prayers which you may learn,
        then you may choose to study that book.  If you are a mage, rogue, 
        druid, ranger, necromancer, or assassin, you may actually choose which 
        spell to study.  If you are a priest or paladin, your gods will choose 
        a prayer for you.  This command takes some energy.

Cast a spell (m)
        To cast a spell, you must have previously learned the spell and
        must have in your inventory a book from which the spell can be
        read.  Each spell has a chance of failure which starts out fairly
        large but decreases as you gain levels.  If you don't have enough
        mana to cast a spell, you will be prompted for confirmation.  If
        you decide to go ahead, the chance of failure is greatly increased,
        and you may lose a point of constitution.  Since you must read the
        spell from a book, you cannot be blind or confused while casting,
        and there must be some light present.  This command takes some energy.

Pray a prayer (p)
        To pray effectively, you must have previously learned the prayer
        and must have in your inventory a book from which the prayer can
        be read.  Each prayer has a chance of being ignored which starts
        out fairly large but decreases as you gain levels.  If you don't
        have enough mana to cast a spell, you will be prompted for
        confirmation.  If you decide to go ahead, the chance of failure
        is greatly increased, and you may lose a point of constitution.
        Since you must read the prayer from a book, you cannot be blind
        or confused while praying, and there must be some light present.
        This command takes some energy.

--- Player Manipulation Commands ---

End a shapechange (])
        This command will return you to your normal state, if you have 
        previously transformed yourself into any creature.


--- Object Manipulation Commands ---

Eat some food (E)
        You must eat regularly to prevent starvation.  As you grow hungry,
        a message will appear at the bottom of the screen saying "Hungry".
        If you go hungry long enough, you will become weak, then start
        fainting, and eventually, you may will die of starvation.  You
        may use this command to eat food in your inventory.  Note that
        you can sometimes find food in the dungeon, but it is not always
        wise to eat strange food.  This command takes some energy.

Fuel your lantern/torch (F)
        If you are using a torch and have more torches in your pack,
        or you are using a lantern and have flasks of oil in your pack,
        then your can "refuel" them with this command.  Torches and Lanterns
        are limited in their maximal fuel.  In general, two flasks will fully
        fuel a lantern and two torches will fully fuel a torch.  This command
        takes some energy.

Quaff a potion (q)
        Use this command to drink a potion.  Potions affect the player in
        various ways, but the effects are not always immediately obvious. 
        This command takes some energy.

Read a scroll (r)
        Use this command to read a scroll.  Scroll spells usually have an
        area effect, except for a few cases where they act on other objects.
        Reading a scroll causes the parchment to disintegrate as the scroll
        takes effect.  Most scrolls which prompt for more information can be
        aborted (by pressing escape), which will stop reading the scroll
        before it disintegrates.  This command takes some energy.
 
Inscribe an object ({) 
        This command inscribes a string on an object.  The inscription is
        displayed inside curly braces after the object description.  The
        inscription is limited to the particular object (or pile) and is
        not automatically transferred to all similar objects.  Under certain
        circumstances, Angband will display "fake" inscriptions on certain
        objects ("cursed", "broken", "tried", "empty", "NN% off") when
        appropriate.  These "fake" inscriptions are "covered up" by real
        inscriptions, but will re-appear if the real inscription is removed.
        In addition, Angband will occasionally place a "real" inscription on
        an object for you, normally as the result of your character getting
        a "feeling" about the item.  All characters will get "feelings" about
        weapons and armor after carrying them for a while.  Warriors get the
        most detailed feelings, and get them quicker than any other class.
        An item labeled as "{empty}" was found to be out of charges, and an
        item labeled as "{tried}" is a "flavored" item which the character
        has used, but whose effects are unknown.  Certain inscriptions have
        a meaning to the game - see "@#", "@x#", "!*", and "!x", in the 
        section on inventory object selection.

Uninscribe an object (})
        This command removes the inscription on an object.  This command will
        have no effect on "fake" inscriptions added by the game itself.

--- Magical Object Commands ---

Activate an artifact (A)
        You have heard rumors of special weapons and armor deep in the
        Pits, items that can let you breath fire like a dragon or light
        rooms with just a thought.  Should you ever be lucky enough to
        find such an item, this command will let you activate its special
        ability.  Special abilities can only be used if you are wearing or
        wielding the item.  This command takes some energy.

Aim a wand (a) or Zap a wand (z)
        Wands must be aimed in a direction to be used.  Wands are magical
        devices, and therefore there is a chance you will not be able to
        figure out how to use them if you aren't good with magical
        devices.  They will fire a shot that affects the first object or
        creature encountered or fire a beam that affects anything in a
        given direction, depending on the wand.  An obstruction such as a
        door or wall will generally stop the effects from traveling any
        farther.  This command requires a direction and can use a target.
        This command takes some energy.

Use a staff (u) or Zap a staff (Z)
        This command will use a staff.  A staff is normally very similar
        to a scroll, in that they normally either have an area effect or
        affect a specific object.  Staves are magical devices, and there
        is a chance you will not be able to figure out how to use them.
        This command takes some energy.
 
Zap a rod (z) or Activate a rod (a)
        Rods are extremely powerful magical items, which cannot be burnt
        or shattered, and which can have either staff-like or wand-like
        effects, but unlike staves and wands, they don't have charges.
        Instead, they draw on the ambient magical energy to recharge
        themselves, and therefore can only be activated once every few
        turns.  The recharging time varies depending on the type of rod.
        This command may require a direction (depending on the type of
        rod, and whether you are aware of its type) and can use a target.
        This command takes some energy.

--- Throwing and Missile Weapons ---

Fire an item (f) or Fire an item (t)
        You may throw any object carried by your character.  Depending on
        the weight, it may travel across the room or drop down beside you.
        Only one object from a pile will be thrown at a time.  Note that
        throwing an object will often cause it to break, so be careful!
        If you throw something at a creature, your chances of hitting it
        are determined by your pluses to hit, your ability at throwing,
        and the object's pluses to hit.  Once the creature is it, the
        object may or may not do any damage to it.  You've heard rumors
        that some objects found in the dungeon can do huge amounts of
        damage when thrown, but you're not sure which objects those
        are....  Note that flasks of oil will do a fairly large chunk
        of damage to a monster on impact, supposedly representing fire
        damage, but it works against fire elementals too...  If you are
        wielding a missile launcher compatible with the object you are
        throwing, then you automatically use the launcher to fire the
        missile with much higher range, accuracy, and damage, then you
        would get by just throwing the missile.  Fire or Throw requires
        a direction.  Targeting mode (see the next command) can be invoked
        with "*" at the "Direction?" prompt.  This command takes some energy.

Throw an item (v)
        You may throw any object carried by your character.  The lighter
        the object, the farther you can throw it.  Only one object from a
        stack may be thrown at a time.  Throwing an object may break it.
        If you throw something at a monster, your chances of hitting it
        are determined by your pluses to hit, your ability at throwing,
        and the object's pluses to hit.  If the object hits the monster,
        it may or may not do damage.  Some objects, such as weapons, or
        flasks of oil, can do a substantial amount of damage.  This
        command requires a direction, and can take a target.  This command
        takes some energy.

Targeting Mode (*)
        This will allow you to aim your spells and such at a specific
        monster or grid, so that you can point directly towards that
        monster or grid (even if this is not a "compass" direction) when
        you are asked for a direction.  You can set a target using this
        command, or you can set a new target at the "Direction?" prompt when
        appropriate.  At the targeting prompt, you have many options.  First
        of all, targetting mode starts targetting nearby monsters which can
        be reached by "projectable" spells and thrown objects.  In this mode,
        you can press "t" (or "5" or ".") to select the current monster,
        space to advance to the next monster, "-" to back up to the previous
        monster, direction keys to advance to a monster more or less in that
        direction, "r" to "recall" the current monster, "q" to exit targetting
        mode, and "p" (or "o") to stop targetting monsters and enter the mode
        for targetting a location on the floor or in a wall.  Note that if
        there are no nearby monsters, you will automatically enter this mode.
        Note that hitting "o" is just like "p", except that the location
        cursor starts on the last examined monster instead of on the player.
        In this mode, you use the "direction" keys to move around, and the
        "q" key to quit, and the "t" (or "5" or ".") key to target the cursor
        location.  Note that targetting a location is slightly "dangerous",
        as the target is maintained even if you are far away.  To cancel an
        old target, simply hit "*" and then ESCAPE (or "q").  Note that when
        you cast a spell or throw an object at the target location, the path
        chosen is the "optimal" path towards that location, which may or may
        not be the path you want.  Sometimes, by clever choice of a location
        on the floor for your target, you may be able to convince a thrown
        object or cast spell to squeeze through a hole or corridor that is
        blocking direct access to a different grid.  Launching a ball spell
        or breath weapon at a location in the middle of a group of monsters
        can often improve the effects of that attack, since ball attacks are
        not stopped by interposed monsters if the ball is launched at a target.
        
--- Looking Commands ---

Full screen map (M)
        This command will show a map of the entire dungeon, reduced by a
        factor of nine, on the screen.  Only the major dungeon features
        will be visible because of the scale, so even some important
        objects may not show up on the map.  This is particularly useful
        in locating where the stairs are relative to your current
        position, or for identifying unexplored areas of the dungeon.

Locate player on map (L) or Where is the player (W)
        This command lets you scroll your map around, looking at all sectors
        of the current dungeon level, until you press escape, at which point
        the map will be re-centered on the player if necessary.  To scroll
        the map around, simply press any of the "direction" keys.  The top
        line will display the sector location, and the offset from your
        current sector.

Look around (l) or Examine things (x)
        This command is used to look around at nearby monsters (to determine 
        their type and health) and objects (to determine their type).  It is 
        also used to find out what objects (if any) are under monsters, and 
        if a monster is currently inside a wall, and what is under the player.
        When you are looking at something, you may hit 'l', space, or '?' to 
        display or hide the list of objects in a pile, or space to advance to 
        the next interesting monster, feature, or object, or minus ('-') to go 
        back to the previous monster, feature, or object, or a direction key 
        to advance to the nearest interesting monster or object (if any) in 
        that general direction, or 'r' to recall information about the current 
        monster race, or 'q' or escape to stop looking around.  You always 
        start out looking at the floor square you are on.

Observe an item (I)
        This command lets you observe a previously *identified* item.
        This will tell you things about the special powers of the object.
        Currently, it only makes sense for artifacts and ego-items.

--- Message Commands ---

Repeat level feeling (^F)
        Repeats the feeling about the dungeon level that you got when you
        first entered the level.

View previous messages (^P)
        This command shows you all the recent messages.  You can scroll
        through them, or exit with ESCAPE.

Take notes (:)
        This command allows you to take notes, which will then appear in
        your message list (prefixed with "Note:").

--- Game Status Commands ---

Character Description (C)
        Brings up a full description of your character, including your
        skill levels, your current and potential stats, and various other
        information.  From this screen, you can change your name or use
        the file character description command to save your character
        status to a file.  That command saves additional information,
        including your background, your inventory, and the contents of
        your house.

Check knowledge (~)
        This command allows you to ask about the knowledge possessed by
        your character.  Currently, this includes being able to list all
        known artifacts, uniques, objects, and the contents of your 
        home.  Normally, once an artifact is generated, and lost, it 
        can never again be found, and will become known to the player.  
        With preserve mode, an artifact can never be lost until it is 
        known to the player.  In either case, any known artifacts will 
        never again be generated.  Uniques are monsters which can only be 
        killed once per game.  Certain objects come in flavors, such as 
        a steel rod or yellow potion, and this command will allow you to 
        display all known flavors.

Interact with the system (!)
        Allow the user to interact with the underlying visual system.
        This command is currently unused.
 
--- Saving and Exiting Commands ---

Save and Quit (Ctrl-X)
        To save your game so that you can return to it later, use this
        command.  Save files will also be generated (hopefully) if the
        game crashes due to a system error.  After you die, you can use
        your savefile to play again with the same options and such.

Save (Ctrl-S)
        This command saves the game but doesn't exit Angband.  Use this
        frequently if you are paranoid about having your computer crash
        (or your power go out) while you are playing.

Quit (commit suicide) (Q or Ctrl-K)
        Kills your character and exits Angband.  You will be prompted to
        make sure you really want to do this, and then asked to verify
        that choice.  Note that dead characters are dead forever.

--- User pref file commands ---

Interact with options (=)
        Allow you to interact with options.  Note that using the "cheat"
        options may mark your savefile as unsuitable for the high score
        list.  You may change normal options using the "X" and "Y" user
        pref commands.  The "window" options allow you to specify what
        should be drawn in any of the special sub-windows (not available
        on all platforms). See the help file "options.txt" for more info.

Interact with macros (@)
        Allow you to interact with macros.  You may load or save macros
        from user pref files, create macros of various types, or define
        keymaps.  You must define a "current action", shown at the bottom
        of the screen, before you attempt to use any of the "create macro"
        commands, which use that "current action" as their action.  This
        is a horrible interface, and will be fixed eventually.

Interact with visuals (%)
        Allow you to interact with visuals.  You may load or save visuals
        from user pref files, or modify the attr/char mappings for the
        monsters, objects, and terrain features.  You must use the "redraw"
        command (^R) to redraw the map after changing attr/char mappings.

Interact with colors (&)
        Allow the user to interact with colors.  This command only
        works on some systems.
 
--- Help ---

Help (?)
        Brings up the Angband on-line help system.  Note that the help
        files are just text files in a particular format, and that other
        help files may be available on the Net.  In particular, there are
        a variety of spoiler files which do not come with the standard
        distribution.  Check the place you got Angband from or ask on the
        newsgroup rec.games.roguelike.angband about them. 

Identify Symbol (/)
        Use this command to find out what a character represents.  For
        instance, by pressing "/.", you can find out that the "." symbol
        stands for a floor spot.

        There are three special symbols you can use with the Identify
        Symbol command to access specific parts of your monster memory.
        Typing Ctrl-A when asked for a symbol will recall details about
        all monsters, typing Ctrl-U will recall details about all unique
        monsters, and typing Ctrl-N will recall details about all
        non-unique monsters.

        If the character stands for a creature, you are asked if you want
        to recall details.  If you answer yes, information about the
        creatures you have encountered with that symbol is shown in the
        Recall window if available, or on the screen if not.  You can also
        answer "k" to see the list sorted by number of kills, or "p" to
        see the list sorted by dungeon level the monster is normally found
        on.  Pressing ESCAPE at any point will exit this command.

Game Version (V)
        This command will tell you what version of Oangband you are using.
        For more information, see the "version.txt" help file.


--- Extra Commands ---

Toggle Choice Window (^E) 
        Toggles the display in any sub-windows (if available) which are
        displaying your inventory or equipment.

Redraw Screen (^R)
        This command adapts to various changes in global options, and
        redraws all of the windows.  It is normally only necessary in
        abnormal situations, such as after changing the visual attr/char
        mappings, or enabling "graphics" mode.

Load screen dump (left-paren)
        This command loads a "snap-shot" of the current screen from the file
        "dump.txt", and displays it on the screen.

Save screen dump (right-paren)
        This command dumps a "snap-shot" of the current screen to the file
        "dump.txt", including encoded color information.


