=== Conditions and effects ===

As you play the game, you will inevitablly come under the effect of spells and
attacks that may cause your character to exhibit certain conditions, both
benificial and harmful. You can see what currently effects your character by
displaying the by displaying the Character Screen ("C"), and then hitting "h"
twice.

Positive conditions:
     Absorb Hit:
         As long as this lasts, damage caused to your character will have an 
         inverse effect, healing him instead. The more damage you absorb, the
         shorter this will last.
     Heroism:
         Heroism makes you temporary immune to fear, and grants you a bonus
         to hit.
     Blessed:
         Blessing provides you a small bonus to AC and to hit.
     Berserk:
         Berserk rage provides you a large bonus to hit, at a cost of an AC
         penalty.
     Shield:
         Shield adds to your AC, making it easier to avoid blows.
     Prot. Evil:
         Evil creatures have a chance of being repelled when attacking you, 
         making their attack an instant miss.
     Resilient:
         Resilience is the most powerful temporary protection a character may 
         acheive. It both signifiacntly raises your AC and also makes you 
         only suffer 1/3 of any damage recieved.

Negative conditions:
     Blind:
         While blind, you can not see your surroundings, nor can your read
         scrolls. Only bards and mystics may cast spells blinded.
     Paralyzed:
         Whole paralyzed, you may take no action at all - this is a very 
         dangerous condition to be in!
     Confused:
         Confused characters can not control their own movement, read scrolls,
         cast spells (except mystics), or do 
     Afraid:
         You cannot fight hand-to-hand while afraid.
     Poisoned:
         When poisoned, you will lose hit points every round until the poison
         is cured (or it runs it course).
     Diseased:
         Disease slowly reduces your stats, and may cause attacks of blindness
         or diziness (stunning/confusion). Only characters with very high 
         constituion stand a chance of the disease ending on its own - others
         must use magical healing.
     Stunned:
         When stunned, spell casting and combat become more difficult.
     Hallucination:
         Hallucination causes phantom monsters to appear on screen in addition
         (and instead of) real monsters.
     Mortal wound,Deep gash,Severe cut,Nasty cut,Bad cut,Light cut,Graze:
         If you are wounded, you will lose hit points consistently until healed. 
         Mortal wounds never heal on their own accord - you have to use magical
         healing to survive them.

=== The Special Qualities and Abilities that your Character may Possess === 

After your character is born, you may discover what special qualities and 
immunities he has - and that you know about - by displaying the Character Screen 
(type "C"), and then hitting "h" three times to display a list.  This list is 
very handy for finding out what you qualities you need and do not yet possess.  
Because it only takes into account your racial intrinsics, and fully known 
(*Identified*) or obvious items, consulting this list is not cheating. 

The abilities screen is divided into three vertical columns and one horizontal
one. Each of the three vertical columns is further divided into sub-columns,
which stands for the various equipment slots (a-l or m depending on your class).
In addition, the two rightmost sub-columns stand for character intrinsic 
abilities (@) and temporary abilities granted by spells or items (*).

A list of displayed qualities and their full names follows:

Resistance:
     The leftmost of the three vertical columns displays your resistances. If 
     you have a '*' in one of the columns, that means that the item in question
     grants you immunity to the attack in question. The list of possible 
     resistances is as follows:

     Acid, Elec, Fire, Cold:
          Acid, electricity, fire, and cold resistance. Temporary resistance
          to any of these attacks, unlike other kinds of temporary resistance, 
          is cumulative with normal resistance - in effect you get double 
          resistance. To mark this the temporary resistance is marked with an 
          'x' rather than the normal '+'.
     Poison:
          Resistance to poison. Lowers damage from poison attacks and prevents 
          you from becoming poisoned. Like the elemental resistances, temporary 
          poison resistance is cumulative with other resistances.
     Disease
          Resistance to disease. Lowers damage from disease attacks + prevents 
          you from becoming diseased.
     Light, dark:
          Resistance to light and darkness attacks. Lowers damage from the 
          appropriate attack, and prevents you from being blinded by it.
     Confus:
          Resistance to confusion. Lowers damage from confusion attacks and 
          prevents you from being confused.
          You cannot fight hand-to-hand when panicking.  Some potions remove 
          fear and you may obtain resist fear from various items of equipment.
     Sound, Shard, Water, Nexus, Nether, Chaos, Disen, Time, Mana:
          Resistance to sound, shards, water nexus, nether, chaos, time, mana
          and disenchantment. Like other resistances, these both reduce damage
          from the corrosponding attack type and prevent any other ill effects
          it may have.

Abilities:
          The other two vertical columns display your characters abilities. 
          These are as follows:

     Free Actn:
          Some creatures are able to paralyze or slow you with melee attacks or 
          spells.  Free Action is a survival essential deep in the dungeon.
     Hold Life:
          Characters with Hold Life resist experience draining attacks, and may 
          even escape their effects entirely.
     No Blind:
          Total immunity to blindness.
     Bravery:
          Protects you from fear.
     S. Digest:
          Slow Digestion reduces the amount of food you consume.
     Fthr Fall:
          Feather Fall lowers the damage from pits and trap doors.
     Light:
          Light allows you to see in the dungeon. A '*' stands for the normal
          light source. Other items that grant light are marked with a '+'
     Regen:
          Characters who regenerate regain hit points at twice the normal rate 
          and mana at 1.5x the normal rate.  Characters who regenerate need to 
          eat heartily.
     Telepathy:
          Telepathy is an extremely useful ability, allowing you to sense most
          monsters (except mindless ones and some of those with weird thought 
          patterns) even through walls.
     See Invisible:
          Many creatures in the dungeons are invisible, and you will need to 
          keep some source of permanent or temporary see invisible handy if you  
          descend more than a few levels into the dungeon.
     Stealth :
          Items with this ability decrease the amount of noise your character 
          makes as he moves around the dungeon and performs actions.
     Search:
          Items with this ability allow your character to find traps and secret 
          doors more easily.
     Infra-vsn:
          Some objects increase the range at which you may see warm-blooded 
          creatures, regardless of whether they are illuminated or even visible 
          to the unaided eye.
     Tunneling:
          All shovels and picks and certain other weapons grant bonuses to 
          tunnelling skill.
     Speed:
          The faster you move, the fewer dangerous things monsters can do to 
          you before you get to take a turn.  Speed items are rare for all but 
          high-level characters.
     Blows:
          Extra blows are one of the most useful abilities a melee fighter may
          ever recieve.
     Shots:
          Some missile launchers allow you to spend less time firing each shot.
     Mana:
          The object grants a direct bonus to mana.
     Health:
          The object grants a direct bonus to health.
     Might:
          Some missile launchers have a higher base damage multiplier than 
          normal.
     Impact:
          This ability causes your blows occasionally to start earthquakes.
     Drn Items:
          The item slowly drains the magic out of your equipment.
     Drn Exp:
          As long as you equip this item, you will slowly lose experience.
     Teleport:
          You will randomly teleport without control.
     Aggravate:
          Monsters around you will become aggravated at your every move - 
          beware!

Weapon Abilities:
          The horizontal row depicts the special abilities possessed by your 
          weapon. 
     Slays:
          The ten leftmost columns give your weapon damage bonuses against 
          certain monster types. From left to right, they are-
          Animals, Plants, Evil, Chaos, Undead, Demons, Orcs, Trolls, Giants
          and Dragons. 
     Xdragon: 
          Some weapons have an even greater bonus against dragons.
     Bless:
          Priests may use blessed weapons without repercussion, even if they
          are bladed.
     Wound:
          Only available for swords, monsters struck by this weapon receive
          extra damage from bleeding.
     Terror:
          Monsters struck by this weapon have a greater chance of fleeing.
     Brands:
          The final seven columns stand for weapons branded with elemental or
          other magical attacks. The four elemental attacks (acid, electricity,
          fire, and cold) cause extra damage to monsters that aren't resistant.
          Weapons branded with either light or darkness cause both extra
          damage and have a chance of blinding the opponent, while venom-
          branded weapons may cause a monster to be poisoned in addition to
          the bonus damage.
          

