PORTRALIS NEWBIES GUIDE
-------------------------

Welcome to Portralis! Formerly known as NewAngband, Portralis contains much
improvements compared to the original NewAngband, so much that it would
be safe to say that Portralis is actually a variant based on NewAngband!

In Portralis, you take the role of a fantasy character, which you create
yourself. There are many races, classes and powers a character can obtain!
You will then be thrown in a huge world full of treasures, dungeons,
towns, cities and more! Unlike the original Angband, where you have one
generic town and a single dungeon, Portralis features several different
towns, each with peoples you interact with. Each towns contains several
NPC(non-player characters) that will become your friends or enemies, you
will find many dungeons and caves to explore, and many treasures that
will make richer and more powerful!

This guide is made to help beginner players create a successful character.
If you are not familiar with Angband or other roguelike games, you may
find the game a bit confusing at first. But fortunately, this guide, along
with the list of commands and the other guides, will greatly help you
getting a better understanding of the game and it's concepts.

CREATING A CHARACTER
----------------------

When starting the game, you will be prompted to choose a sex and a race
for your character. When choosing a race, a brief description of the
race will be displayed, as well as the various advantages/disadvantages
of the race. There are 10 races to choose from, excluding the Monster
race. If you are a beginner, you should choose a regular race instead
of the Monster race, as this race provides a totally different type
of gameplay. Once done, you will be asked a few more questions, such
as if you want to change the character's background and age. You will
also be able to reroll the character's heigth and weight. Note that all
these traits are purely cosmetic, and do not affect the gameplay.

Once completed, a prologue of the story will be shown, and you will be
sent to the small town of Udor. And from there, the game will start!

GETTING STARTED
-----------------

If it's the first time you play a roguelike game, you will notice that
around you are all kind of symbols and letters. The '@' represents the
player, and all the letters represents peoples and monsters. Consult
the command and features guide to know what everything stands for. Use
the arrow keys to move around, and get familiar with the various commands.
Don't worry, the townsfolks and the guards are friendly, and will not
attack you, so you can take your time.

After familiarizing yourself with the commands, you may want to have
a look at your character's sheet. Press the capital 'C', and a character
sheet will be displayed. Take your time to take a look at the various
attributes, such as your stats, damages done, etc... You can then use
the 'z' key to display other information, such as background, skills
and the character's resistances.

Now that you got a bit familiar with the character, let's get started
for real! You are now free to start your adventure! However, if you
look at your inventory, you will see that you only have a short sword,
a dagger and a hard leather armor, which is not much. You start the
game with 1000 golds, so now, it's time to do some shopping! Head to
the armor shop(which is represented by a '2'), and look at what's
available. If you plan on being a warrior who defeat enemies in close
combat, it is wise to purchase a strong suit of armor, a shield and
some good helmet, boots and gauntlets. If you are a wizard, you may
want to keep some money for a spell book, and therefore avoid spending
too much here. Next, you should visit the weapon shop ('3'). There, you
will be able to purchase better weapons. If you are a warrior, you will
probably want to purchase something like a pike or a broad swords, which
will be better than your short sword(although the short sword will allow you
to have more attacks per rounds than a broad sword). Before buying a
weapon, examine 'x' it first. Make sure the weapon has a type that
you plan on using(don't buy a Polearm if you plan on focusing on the
Swords skill!). If you plan on using ranged weapons, you can also buy
them here(a short bow and some arrows are probably a good starting
choice, unless you plan on being a ranged attacks specialist, in which
case a Long Bow or a crossbow would be better.). Now, once done, if
you plan on using magic, pay a visit to the magic shop ('6'), where you
can buy spellbooks. Consult the Spells Guide to learn more about the
various magical spells. For now, buy the book of Missile, which will
allow you to create some offensive spells. Once you purchase a book,
use the 'G' command to gain the spell. Finally, you may wish to visit
the temple('4') or alchemy shop('5') to buy a few healing potions and
some scrolls. It is recommended that all adventurers carry some scrolls
of Word of Recall, which will allow you to instantly teleport to the
last town you visited! The general store ('1') has lanterns which are
better than your torches, as well as rations of food. You could buy
a lantern and some extra food too.

Now that you got some nice equipment, it's time to prepare for the adventure!
Use the 'w' command to equip your weapons and armors. You can then press
'e' to see what you are currently wearing/wielding. Use the 't' command to
take off something you no longer want to wear. If you purchased a book of
Missile, use the 'G' command to learn the spell. You will then want to
create an actual offensive spell. To create a spell, use the 'm' command,
and then press 'M' to make a spell. The spell creation window will appear.
Choose the school of magic that contains the magic effect you want(in this
case, it will be Elemental). Next, press the key that corresponds to the
effect you want(in this case, it's Missile). After that, you will be able
to set various parameters, such as damages per levels and radius of your
spell. A good starting 'Magic Missile' spell would be a bolt spell that
does 10 damages/levels. So set the spell's power to 10. Leave the type
to bolt