PORTRALIS SKILLS GUIDE
-----------------------

As your character grows in experience levels, he/she will be able to
master a large number of skills, each providing it's own field of
expertise. Each levels you gain will give you 2 skill points(more if
you have high intelligence/wisdom), and you will be able to raise
your skills and become more powerful.

Skills are split in two categories: General skills and Specialized
skills. General skills offers a wider range of possibilitiesm while
specialized skills will maximize one particular domain. For example,
the Fighting skill will improve damages with all weapons you use,
while the Swords skill will improve the damages more than the
Fighting skill, but only with swords weapons.

GENERAL SKILLS
****************

FIGHTING:
The Fighting skill is the ability to fight in melee combat. There
are a wide range of weapons in Portalis, and this skill will
allow you to make use of all of them. A particularly skilled
fighter can learn to do Power Attacks: an attack that consist
in gathering full strength, and then release a mighty blow.

Effects: - Extra damages = Base weapon damages * Fighting skill level
         - Extra unarmed damages = Base unarmed damages(1d3) * (Fighting 
           skill level)
	 - +1 to base unarmed damages dice and side every 40 points.

The Fighting skill allow you to use any weapons you find, and do good
damages with it. While this is a big advantage over the specialized
skills, specialized skills are stronger, and offer more varied special
feats. However, it is very frustrating to be a swords specialist, only
to find a rare special axe or a powerful artifact mace.

Also keep in mind that the Fighting skill is cumulative with the other
weapon skills. So if you have 10 Fighting skill and 4 Swords skill,
Swords counting for 50% higher than Fighting, it gives you a total
skill multiplier of 16 for damages.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Power Attack, Level 1(Active, 20 points): This special technique 
allow you to gather strength and power, and deliver very powerful 
attacks.
	
Effects: When you use Power Attack, your base Strength will be tripled,
and when the blow is delivered, total damages are doubled. Your next
serie of attacks will be extremely powerful. However, note that
using Power Attack will take two turns to charge, so it leaves you
quite vulnerable during the charging time. Also note that the
Power Attack will only be applied to your first attack. So if you
have 10 blows/round and use Power Attack, only the first one will
be empowered.

- Power Attack, Level 2(Active, 40 points): A more powerful version
of Power Attack, it also take longer to charge.
	
Effects: With the Power Attack Level 2, your strength will become
six times higher, and total damages will be tripled. However, it
takes three turns to charge.

- Power Attack, Level 3(Active, 60 points): The most powerful
version of the Power Attack, but requires a long charge time.
	
Effects: With the Power Attack Level 3, your strength will become
ten times higher, and total damages will be quadrupled. However, it
takes four turns to charge. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------




--------------------------------------------------------------------

SWORDS:
The sword is probably the most popular weapon. There are many
types of swords, including Long Swords, Broad Swords, Katanas
and Sabers. Boosting your skill with the swords makes you
better at using them, allowing you to deal much more damages.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base sword damages * (150% Swords skill level)

Swords are the most abundant weapons in the game. They offer
a wide array of choices, and the most powerful sword, the
King's Sword, is a one-handed weapon and is very dangerous.
Choosing the swords skill is a good choice if you wish to
combine a good offense with a good defense.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Parry(Passive, 10 points): With enough training, one can learn
to block enemy attacks with a sword.
	
Effects: 10% chances to block an attack, cumulative with shield
bonus. Maximum blocking chance is still 75%.


- Sword Spin(Active, 20 points): A well trained warrior can use
this ability to hit multiple foes surrounding him. 
	
Effects: Perform a spin attack, and damage enemies surrounding
you. The damages are 50% higher than a normal attack.
	
- Fencer's Spirit(Passive, 50 points): After a long training, a
warrior can eventually learn to use a sword with a greatly
superior accuracy. Such a warrior will have an easy time hitting
most foes in combat.

Effects: Double your to_hit while wielding a sword.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

HAFTED:
Hafted weapons include maces, morning stars, war hammers and other
blunt weapons. While not as common and popular as swords, hafted
weapons offers both good one-handed weapons and two-handed weapons.
Their main advantage lies in the fact that blows from blunt weapons
delivers a lot of impact, and some very useful feats can be performed
to take advantage of this.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base hafted weapon damages * Hafted skill level

Hafted weapons offers a nice alternative to the swords. There are some
very good one-handed weapons, and some powerful two-handed weapons as well.
While the one-handed weapons aren't as good as those in the Swords, and the
two-handed in the Polearms, Hafted weapons offers some unique and powerful 
abilities to a skilled user.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Smash(Active, 15 points): A warrior using this ability can deliver
a blow with such an impact that not only will it do more damages,
it will shatter a part of target's defense while knocking them away.

Effects: Enemy is damaged, and is knocked away, allowing you to avoid
direct physical contact. The enemy will also lose 10% of it's defense.

- Dizzy Smash(Active, 40 points): This ability is similar to Smash,
except that it is focused on target's head instead of entire body.
The enemy will not lose defense, but has a chance to become confused
for a few turns after the attack.

Effects: Enemy is damaged, and is knocked away, allowing you to avoid
direct physical contact. The enemy is also confused for a few turns.
Note that Elites and Bosses cannot be confused. Dizzy Smash does
more damages than Smash.

- Shattering Blow(Active, 70 points): A very well trained warrior
can use his or her weapon to deliver a blow with a lot of impact, and
focus the impact on target's armor, scales and/or bones. By doing so,
the target's armor, scales and bones will shatter, and the victim
will become extremely vulnerable.

Effects: Reduce target's defense to 0. Note that this attack doesn't
knock the enemy away, and doesn't do any damages, so use it wisely!

--------------------------------------------------------------------

POLEARMS:
Polearms are spears, halberds and other, similar weapons. Most of them
are two-handed weapons, and are great for dealing a lot of damages.
Polearms are known for being able to strike foes from a short distance. 

Effects: -Extra damages = Base polearm weapon damages * Polearms skill level

Polearms are probably the most deadly weapons in the game. The drawback to
this is that they are two-handed, and you won't be able to use a shield
most of the time. You will eventually get the ability to parry with polearms,
but this is nowhere near as good as using a powerful shield. However,
the last spear ability, Impale, is extremely deadly if you have high
strength.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Thrust(Active, 5 points): A warrior trained in polearms can strike a foe
from a short distance. This allow him or her to strike the opponents before
they come close, possibly killing them.

Effects: Thrust will attack from a short distance. If there is an enemy
next to you, and another one behind it, you can strike both of them at once!
Thrust only gives one blow, but it does more damages than a regular blow.


- Parry(Passive, 25 points): Polearms are long, and are therefore excellent
weapons to parry attacks from enemies. They are even better than swords,
as they are held with both hands, offering more stability when they come
in contact with the enemy's weapon.

Effects: 20% chances to block an enemy's attack. NOT cumulative with shield
bonus. If you use a one-handed polearm, and a shield, only the shield bonus
will be counted.

	
- Impale(Passive, 90 points): A master of the polearms can use all his or
her strength to pierce trough an opponent's body, and slay the vital organs.
This gives the victim an atrocious, generally fatal wound.

Effects: Double your base weapon's damage roll. If you have a strong
weapon, this can be deadly.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

DAGGERS:
Daggers are short bladed weapons, ressembling swords, but much smaller
and concealable. Usually not the warrior's favorite weapon, daggers
can be used much quicker than swords due to their light weight, and
because they are small, they can easily pierce trough a target's armor.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base dagger weapon damages * Daggers skill level

Daggers are fun weapons, and can also become quite deadly should you
choose to train in this skill. Daggers aren't powerful, but they give
the wielder a lot of attacks per rounds, making them quite useful,
especially defense piercing or hit rate lowering daggers.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Piercing Stab(Passive, 5 points): Because of their size, a dagger can
easily pierce trough a target's armor. This allow a trained warrior to
hit the opponent's vital parts more easily.

Effects: 25% bonus to your hit rate when striking with a dagger.

- Eye Stab(Active, 30 points): Stabbing with a dagger is quick and easy,
but this also allow a warrior to easily strike specific parts of the body. 
By stabbing the target's eyes, they will be blinded, greatly lowering their
attack rating, and because they can't see, they will have trouble dodging,
and will lose a potion of their defense.

Effects: Reduce target's attack rating by 50% and defense by 25%. Note that 
this ability will only work on humanoid opponents, such as humans, elves, 
orcs, trolls. The only exception are the Eye type monsters, who will also 
suffer from this attack.

- Fatal Stab(Active, 80 points): Taking advantage of the fact that daggers
are extremely easy to draw out, this dangerous and vicious technique
consists in quickly stabbing an opponent's vital point, and force the
dagger hard so that it will remain in the victim's body. The infection
and pain is incredible, and the target will become severly wounded and
unable to fight due to the pain.

Effects: To use this technique, you must sacrifice a dagger in your
inventory to struck it into the monster's mody. The more powerful
the dagger, the better this will work. The monster will instantly
lose 10% of it's attack rating, defense, hp and speed, and will
lose an extra 10% for every extra pval the weapon has, up to a maximum
of 90%. Elites, Bosses and Uniques will only lose up to 30%.
Questors such as Variaz will only lose 10%, and their speed will not 
be lowered.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

AXES:
Axes could be best described as a mix between an edged weapon and an
hafted weapon, as the top, while heavy, does not give the impact of
an hafted weapon, but is very sharp, although not as sharp as a
sword would be. Nevertheless, axes are very strong weapons, and
they vary in size and weight. There are the small, light, one-handed
axes and the heavy, two-handed battle axes. Axes are very popular
amongst barbarians and dwarves.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base axe weapon damages * Axe skill level

The axes are the jack-of-all-trades of all weapons. They combine several
advantages of the swords, hafted and polearms weapons. For instance, you
will find good one-handed axes and good two-handed axes, although they
might not be as powerful as their swords or polearms counterparts. However,
both types are good, so if you like switching between one-handed
and two-handed weapons, then the axes are for you.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Chop(Active, 10 points): The first thing a warrior must learn about the
axe is that it is a chopping weapon. Knowing that, a trained warrior can
perform a very strong chopping attack that will damage opponent's armor,
and give a painful blow.

Effects: Does damages, and reduce target's defense by 25%. This ability
does more damages than a normal attack, but only gives one blow.

- Mutilate Legs(Active, 40 points): Executioners often uses axes to mutilate
a prisoner during a torture session. While it is a barbaric and violent
act, barbarians themselves have no objections on doing that on an opponent,
one of the reasons the axe is popular amongst them. In fact, they have learned
to cut off their opponents various body parts during combat. The ability
to mutilate the opponent's legs is one of them. Dwarves, due to their small
size and their inborn slowness, tend to enjoy using this technique.

Effects: Does damages, and prevent monster from moving. Note that it only
prevent the monster from moving, it does not prevent it to attack or cast
spells. Does not work against weapon immune monsters, and questors such
as Variaz are unaffected.

- Mutilate Arms(Active, 70 points): Another mutilation of the barbarians
consists in mutilating the target's arms, claws and hands. By doing so,
the target will be unable to use physical attacks.

Effects: Does damages, and prevent monster from using physical attacks.
They can still use their magical attacks. Does not work against elites,
bosses and uniques.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

RODS:
Rods are similar to wands, but are a little bigger, and can be used as a
weapon. Rods aren't powerful, but the fact that they make spellcasting
much easier encourage some wizards to train to use them effectively.
Should their magic be useless against a foe, they will still be able to
use their rod as a secondary weapon. 

Effects: -Extra damages = Base rod damages * Rods skill level
         - +1 damage/level per skill points to rods magic attacks.

This skill is mostly useful to mages or warrior/mage type characters. Don't
invest in this skill if you don't plan to use magical attacks. Otherwise,
while the rods aren't too powerful as weapons, they offer special abilities
to those who know how to use them correctly.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Infinite Charges(Passive, 15 points): Those trained to use a rod can learn
to control the amount of power used in the activation. They learn how to
use enough power to fully activate the crystal, while not depleting it's
energy.

Effects: When you zap a rod, your crystal will not lose it's charges.


- Amplifed Recovery(Passive, 30 points): When casting spells, the user of
the rod can use it to amplify his or her magical energy. This allow the
user to regenerate his or her mana at an accelerated rate.

Effects: You recover your mana quicker.

	
- Improved Spellcasting(Passive, 70 points): A master of the rod can use it
to charge up magic spells before casting them. This allow the spells to be
much more powerful than they would normally be.

Effects: You receive a 50% bonus on your Spellcraft skill. This can really
help improving your spells!

--------------------------------------------------------------------

SHOOTING:
Shooting an enemy from a safe distance has always been considered a good
killing technique. There are many types of ranged weapons: Bows, Crossbows
and Slings. This skill allow you to become good at using all of them.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base ammos damages * Shooting skill level

While ranged attacks aren't as strong as melee attacks, they are much safer,
as melee combat can be extremely risky. If you wish to invest in this skill,
consider putting more points in your Dexterity, so you will have a higher
Shooter Multiplier to furthermore increase the damages of your shots. Some
abilities such as Multiple Arrows can also help increasing the damages A LOT.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Sharpen Ammos(Active, 20 points): It's a fact that arrows, bolts and
pebbles aren't very strong weapons. However, a talented marksman can learn
to sharpen his or her arrows to make them more deadly.

Effects: Increase the damages of your arrows by adding an extra dice, and an
extra dice side(so if you use this on a 1d4 arrow, you will now have a 2d5
arrow).

- Quick Shots(Passive, 40 points): After a long training, a skilled marksman
will learn the ability to shoot arrows at a great speed!

Effects: You get 1 extra shot.

- Returning Shots(passive, 70 points): Probably the most spectacular feat
a marksman can perform is the Returning Shot. By performing this special
ability, the shot will hit the enemy, and will come back to the user
afterwards.

Effects: You won't deplete your ammos while shooting. This allow you to use
those strong Special ammos without fear of losing them. Note that this
feat will not work with Multiple Arrows.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

THROWING:
Although the art of throwing is not as evolved as the art of shooting, some
warriors, usually the strongest ones, prefers to throw strong weapons using
nothing more than brute strength over using bows and arrows. Finding enough
weapons to throw is harder than finding a lot of arrows, but throwing a
powerful weapon can be extremely deadly. 

Effects: -Extra damages = Base item damages * Throwing skill level

Throwing skill can be used to throw boomerangs or any items. Finding a good
number of great items to throw can be hard, but this is usually more powerful
than shooting, especially if you have a high strength. Another point of view
would be that there is ALWAYS something to throw. If your skill is high
enough, you can do some damages by throwing some weak items at enemies,
such as useless pieces of armors, potions or weak weapons. This may allow
you to finish off some weaker enemies from a safe distance.

This skill is also needed to improve the effect of throwing explosive potions
made using the Alchemy skill.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Power throw(passive, 25 points): A warrior trained in the art of throwing
can learn to throw objects with more strength than usual.

Effects: When throwing, you receive a +50% bonus to damages.

- Quick throw(passive, 50 points): A particularly talented warrior can
eventually become good enough to throw a weapon at a very high speed,
allowing him or her to immediatly throw another one, or to escape.

Effects: Throwing will only take half a move. This is useful if you wish to
use hit and run tactics, or if you wish to throw another weapon right away.

- Shattering throw(passive, 70 points): A warrior trained in the art of
throwing can learn the ability to throw weapons with such as great
impact that it will damage the target's armor.

Effects: Enemies struck by thrown items will lose 50% of their defense.
If you throw more than one item, the effect will still be applied. This
can be very useful to make enemies easier to hit, and best of all,
it's a free and passive ability!

--------------------------------------------------------------------

MARTIAL ARTS:
Martial arts have been taught for generations among the various monk orders.
They consist in a variety of bare-handed fighting techniques, allowing the
monk to perform some very powerful unarmed attacks. Due to the war against
the mighty God Of The Void, these once well guarded secrets are now
available for every warriors to learn.

Effects: When using no weapons:
         - +2 to hit per skill points(not with a shield, +1 with armor)
         - +5 to_damages per skill points(not with a shield, 2 with armor)
         - Extra damages = Base unarmed damages(1d3) * (150% Martial arts 
           skill level)
         - +1 to base damages dice and side every 20 points.
         - +1 blows for every 10 points
         - +2 AC for every skill points(if not wearing armor)

Martial arts offers a nice alternative to weapons. While you won't get all
the bonuses awarded for wielding a weapon, the extra to_hit and blows bonus
from the skill will compensate for this.Note that this skill also allow you
to use claws and wrist spikes. When you equip a claw, you will not receive
the bonuses to hit and to damages awarded by the skill, and the damages done
will be calculated the same as any other weapons. However, if your skill
is very high, you will be better off with no weapons at all. The same applies
to shields, but you can still wear arm bands without any penalities. To
benefit fully from the skill, it is best not to wear armor, and therefore,
the monk's Unarmored Combat ability will become very useful. Monks and
Zelars are two excellent classes to support this skill.

Martial arts is also the skill that will boost your melee attacks when
playing as a Monster, or while morphed into a monster. If you plan on
playing the Monster race, or on morphing a lot, consider the Martial Arts
skill!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Power Punch(Active, 15 points): A warrior trained in martial arts is able
to infuse his or her fists with inner energy, allowing him or her to deliver
a very powerful punch that will also reduce target's defense.

Effects: Deliver a punch that deals 5 times normal damages and reduce enemy's
defense by 25%. In other words, the more you use it, the easier it is to
damage your foes with melee attacks!

- Block & Dodge(Passive, 40 points): The art of dodging and blocking is very
important to the monk, who generally shun armors and shields. A well trained
monk will learn to avoid blows from enemies by either blocking with arms, or
dodging.

Effects: Gives you a 25% chances to avoid any attacks. Note that if you wear
heavy armor, you will not get this bonus.

- Stunning Blow(Active, 80 points): One of the monk's most feared ability
is the Stunning Blow. By using a complex martial arts technique, the monk
will paralyze any foes with a single blow.

Effects: 33% chances to reduce enemy's speed to 0. This will not work on 
uniques, elites and bosses.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

AGILITY:
Agility measures the character's aptitude at moving. An agile warrior is able
move more quickly, and can use his or her agility to dodge enemy blows more
easily. Investing in this skill will make you much better at avoiding
attacks from enemies.

Effects: - Adds a multiplier to base AC for every 6 points.
         - +3 bonus to_ac per points.
         - +1 to speed for every 5 points.

Agility is a great skill to invest in. Investing a lot in agility will
greatly improve your AC, and make you very hard to hit in battle. The
better your armor, the more effective this skill will be.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Jump(Active, 1 points): Everyone can jump, but only an agile warrior can jump
very high and very far. By developping natural agility, a warrior can perform
amazing leaps in the air!

Effects: At first, this ability doesn't allow you to jump very far. However,
for every 10 points in Agility, you will gain an extra radius for jumping.
The more agile you are, the farther you can jump. Note that to be able to
jump somewhere, the grid must be visible. You cannot enter unexplored grids
this way. Let's face it, you DON'T jump in the unknown.

- Quick Swap(Passive, 30 points): An agile warrior is quick to draw the right
weapon in battle. This ability allow a trained warrior to change equipement
at great speed. 

Effects: Changing your equipement won't take you any moves, except for
body armors.

- Evade Magic(Passive, 70 points): Warriors with great agility have such
great reflexes and jumping abilities that they can sometime dodge a deadly
magical attack that would be directed toward them.

Effects: 33% chances to evade an enemy's magical or breath attack.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

STEALTH:
Stealth is the skill measuring how good a character is at moving without
making noise. This allow you to move without waking up enemies, or to
sneak into a shop and steal stuff more easily.

Effects: - Allow you to move without being noticed by monsters.
	 - Improve your chances of avoiding enemies while invisible.
         - Increase your odds at stealing from shops. 

Stealth can be useful for moving without waking up sleeping enemies, or
even avoiding woken enemies as well. Or, it can be useful to avoid
waking up a large pack that would easily kill you. Finally, stealing is
always nice, and you will be able to get more items for free!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Hide(Active, 10 points): A master of stealth can quickly hide nearby,
either in shadows, or behind an object, allowing to temporarly escape the
sight of an enemy.

Effects: Your become invisible for 5 turns. It's a very short duration, but
it can be useful if you are chased by a strong enemy.

- Run Away(Active, 20 points): Stealth masters can learn the ability to run
away without making any noise. However, the moves aren't as calculated, and
are somewhat inaccurate, as long as you can escape the sight of the enemy.

Effects: Allow you to phase away. This is similar to a phase door scroll, but it's
completly free!

- Backstab(Passive, 30 points): Stealthy thieves are known for backstabing
their enemies. A high stealth will allow a thief to learn this clever art.

Effects: Allow you to perform backstabs on sleeping enemies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

SPELLCRAFT:
The ancient mystic art of magic has been practiced for many centuries. Even
after all that time, very few understands the true secrets of magic, and
intense research and study is required to be able to use it to it's full
potential.

Effects: - Increase the damages of magical attacks. This includes any
         non-physical attacks: spells, monster magics, rods, magic using
         abilities, etc...
         - Increase the radius of area-of-effects type spells for every 30
         points.

Spellcraft is extremely useful for spellcasters, or any users of magical
attacks. Not only will it makes your spells much more effective, it will
also increase the radius of your spells if you raise it high enough. High
spellcraft + spell boosting abilities will make your spells devastating.
Note that chain attacks such as Tidal Wave or Apocalyptic Blast doesn't
get the increased radius.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Enchanted Blood(Active, 10 points): A wizard using this ability can take
out a portion of his or her own blood to recover some magical energy.

Effects: You can use any amount of hp with this ability. You will gain in mana
what you lose in hp.

- Mana Shield(Active, 40 points): A sorcerer can use this ability to
sacrifice his entire magical energy to surround himself with a shield of
magical energy.

Effects: By using this, you will lose all your mana, and you will gain
some hp beyond your maximum hp. This can be very useful to take extra hits
from enemies. Note that the effects will be gone if you gain a level.

- Mystic Blood(Passive, 80 points): The most powerful sorcerers are said
to have magical or divine blood running trough their veins. This blood is
said to give them a natural advantage over all other magic users.

Effects: You gain a 25% bonus to your maximum mana.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

LEADERSHIP:
Leadership measure a character's ability to lead a group, or even an
entire army. Generals, military commanders, kings and any other leaders
knows that to make an army effective, you need to be a skilled leader
who knows how to get the best from his or her soldiers.

Effects: - Increase the damages of both melee and magical attacks from
           friendly monsters.
         - Gives friendly monsters a better chance to hit.

Leadership makes friendly monsters more powerful. If you like to use
summon spells, or recruit creatures, this skill can really help you
getting the best out of them. A character with a high leadership can
overwhelm the enemy with a large number of creatures, or a small
group of very strong creatures.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Heal Troops(Active, 5 points): Troops gets wounded on the battlefield.
It is a fact. Learning the art of healing the wounded is necessary to
win any battles.

Effects: Heals 10 hp/level on a monster.  

- Morale Boost(Active, 20 points): Slow and lazy soldiers have never been
useful on the battlefield. By giving them a morale boost, this makes them
act faster and better.

Effects: All friendly creatures around you, in a radius of 3, get their
speed boosted by 25%. Their hit rate is also raised by 50%.

- Improved Recruiting(Passive, 50 points): Leading an army is one thing.
Building an army is another. A skilled leader must learn the most
effective ways to convince soldiers to join his or her army.

Effects: Improve your success rate with Hire/Befriend command.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

ALCHEMY:
Your skill at brewing potions from various components, and possibly
some other alchemical items as well. Some alchemists use their skills
to make curative potions, while evil alchemists are skilled at making
deadly poisons. Some war alchemists also brew instable, explosive
potions to throw at their enemies.

Effects: - Allow you to create alchemical items.
	 - Increase damages of explosive potions.
	 - Increase effectiveness of healing potions.

Alchemy gives you the use of the "Combine Items" command, which allow
you to combine two items into one item. If you combine two items,
you will need to have a sufficient alchemical skill to actually
succeed in making it. For instance, the potion of cure critical
wounds has a depth of 5, so you need half the depth in alchemical
skill, rounded down(so in this case, you would need a skill of 2).

Unless you are specialising in throwing explosive potions, you
shouldn't invest too much points in this ability, as placing too
many points will be useless. Place a few points, then see if you
can create some stuff. Only place more if you can't. You will be
much better spreading your points between this skill and the
Crafting skill, as some items require both skills.

And about alchemical recipes...it's up to you to find them!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Decompose Item(Active, 1 point): Items are made from various
components. By using various processes and techniques, you can
disassemble one item to get the components it was originally
made from. Not all items can be decomposed.

Effects: Destroy an item, and place it's two components in your
inventory. Some items cannot be crafted, and will not give you
any components.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

CRAFTING:
Your skill at crafting various weapons, armors and objects from
various components. A skilled smith will be able to create many
types of weapons and armors, and even some unique weapons only
available to the most talented.

Effects: - Allow you to create weapons, armors and other items.
	   - Improve quality of crafted weapons and armors.

Crafting, like Alchemy, gives you the use of the "Combine Items" 
command, which allow you to combine two items into one item. It
works exactly the same way, except it's your Crafting skill
that will be used. Like the Alchemy, don't place too many points
in it, or it will be wasted. Instead, spread your points between
this and Alchemy skill, and take a weapon skill to actually use
the weapons you craft!

As mentionned above, some items require the use of both skills.
For instance, the Poison Dagger require both a dagger(crafting)
and a potion of poison(alchemy). The poison dagger has a depth
of 10, so it's skill requirements is 5. Since it uses both
skills, the cost will be splitted in two, rounded down, so the
poison dagger would require an Alchemy skill of 2 and a Crafting
skill of 2 to be created.

And about crafting combinations...it's up to you to find them!

NOTE: If you use a magical item for crafting, the resulted item
(if any) will NOT be magical, so be warned!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Decompose Item(Active, 1 point): Items are made from various
components. By using various processes and techniques, you can
disassemble one item to get the components it was originally
made from. Not all items can be decomposed.

Effects: Destroy an item, and place it's two components in your
inventory. Some items cannot be crafted, and will not give you
any components.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

COMBAT FEATS:
Combat is not merely about swinging a sword in the strongest and
fastest way. It's about combining one's abilities with other attacks
to create devastating combos. This skill measure the amount of
special attacks you may combine with your normal attacks.

Effects: - 20% chance to sacrifice a blow to perform a special attack
        instead of a normal attack. So for every 5 points, you can
        do it one time with 100% success rate.

This skill allow you to replace your normal blows by special abilities.
When striking an enemy, if your skill is high enough, you will be asked
if you would like to replace a normal blow by a special ability. If you
say yes, the standard special abilities menu will be shown, and you will
choose one of your abilities, which will not take any moves. Not all
abilities may be used though, only those related to combat or melee
attacks. For instance, you may replace a normal blow by a Spin Attack,
but not by a Force Field. Generally, combat-like abilities can all be
used(with a few exceptions), while spell-like abilities cannot.
You will be able to replace as many blows as you want, as long as you
have the skill for it.

Before spending lots of points in this skill, consider two important
things. The first one is, how many blows do you have? There is no
point in spending 50 skill points in this skill if you only have one
blow. And the second is: do you have any special attacks and are they
strong enough to sacrifice a normal attack? If all you have is a
Spin Attack with 1 ability point, chances are you're better with a
normal attack.

However, if used correctly, this skill can turn a melee character
into an extremely dangerous killer!

NOTE: All abilities that you can use with skill are noted in the
abilities guide. Consult it if you don't which abilities work!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- None.
