Corruptions
===========

Corruptions are caused by the inability of mortal bodies to handle the chaotic 
energies of hell without warping and changing.

Corruptions can be gained from a number of sources, ranging from the misuse of 
chaos magic to the whim of infernal patrons.

There are three basic types of corruptions, those that are always active, those 
that activate randomly, and those that the possessor can voluntarily activate.

Corruptions are not named, so the descriptions here are based on the 
descriptions that you see when you use the '~' command.

Persistent Corruptions
======================

"You are superhumanly strong."
This corruption gives you a +4 strength bonus.

"You are puny."
This corruption gives you a -4 strength penalty

"You are a genius."
This corruption gives you +4 intelligence and +4 wisdom bonuses.

"You are an idiot."
This corruption gives you -4 intelligence and -4 wisdom penalties.

"You are very resilient."
This corruption gives you a +4 constitution bonus.

"You are extremely fat."
This corruption gives you a +2 constitution bonus, but a -2 speed penalty.

"You are albino."
This corruption gives you a -4 constitution penalty.

"Your flesh is rotting."
This corruption gives you a -2 constitution penalty and a -1 charisma penalty.

"Your voice is a hoarse rasp."
This corruption gives you a -4 charisma penalty.

"You have a forked tongue."
This corruption gives you a -1 charisma penalty.

"Your appearance is masked with illusion."
This corruption completely negates the charisma modifiers that other corruptions 
give you.

"You have glowing eyes."
This corruption gives you a +15 searching bonus.

"You are resistant to magic."
This corruption makes you more likely to resist spells that are cast on you.

"You have a stench of the grave about you."
This corruption gives you a -3 penalty to stealth.

"You have remarkable infravision."
This corruption gives you 30' infravision, or increases your existing 
infravision by 30'.

"You have goat legs with cloven hooves."
This corruption gives you a +3 bonus to speed.

"Your legs are short stubs."
This corruption gives you a -3 penalty to speed.

"Electricity is running through your veins."
This corruption damages anyone who touches you with an electrical shock.

"Your body is enveloped in flames."
This corruption damages anyone who touches you by burning them.

"Your skin is covered with warts."
This corruption gives you a +5 bonus to armour class but a -2 penalty to 
charisma.

"Your skin has turned into scales."
This corruption gives you a +10 bonus to armour class but a -1 penalty to 
charisma.

"Your skin is made of steel."
This corruption gives you a +25 bonus to armour class but a -1 penalty to 
dexterity.

"You have wings."
This corruption protects you from trap doors and pits.

"You are completely fearless."
This corruption makes you immune to fear.

"You are regenerating."
This corruption makes you regain hit points at a faster rate.

"You are telepathic."
This corruption gives you ESP.

"Your body is very limber."
This corruption gives you a +3 dexterity bonus.

"Your joints ache constantly."
This corruption gives you a -3 dexterity penalty.

"You are protected from the ravages of time."
This corruption gives you a resistance to time based attacks.

"You are susceptible to damage from the elements."
This corruption makes you take extra damage from elemental attacks.

"Your movements are precise and forceful."
This corruption prevents you form being paralysed and gives you a +1 bonus to 
stealth.

"Your body resists serious damage."
This corruption stops any of your ability scores from being drained.

Erratic Corruptions
===================

"You are subject to berserker fits."
This corruption causes you to occasionally go berserk.

"You are subject to cowardice."
This corruption causes you to occasionally become afraid.

"You are teleporting randomly."
This corruption causes you to occasionally teleport to a random place on the 
level.

"You are subject to fits of amnesia."
This corruption causes you to have occasional fits of confusion and 
forgetfulness.

"You have a hallucinatory insanity."
This corruption causes you to occasionally hallucinate.

"You are occasionally surrounded with brimstone."
This corruption causes you to be occasionally surrounded by a cloud of poison.

"You are producing magical energy uncontrollably."
This corruption causes you to be occasionally surrounded by a storm of raw 
magic.

"You attract demons."
This corruption causes demons to occasionally appear near you.

"You have poison fangs."
This corruption gives you an extra attack in melee that does poison damage.

"You have razor sharp claws."
This corruption gives you an extra attack in melee.

"You have large horns on your head."
This corruption gives you an extra attack in melee.

"You move faster or slower randomly."
This corruption causes you to occasionally speed up or slow down.

"You sometimes cause nearby creatures to vanish."
This corruption causes you to occasionally teleport nearby creatures away from 
yourself.

"You sometimes feed off of the light around you."
This corruption causes you to draw in the energy from your light source to heal 
yourself.

"You have small horns on your head."
This corruption gives you an extra attack in melee.

"You attract animals."
This corruption causes animals to seek you out.

"You have bony spines on your joints."
This corruption gives you an extra attack in melee.

"You occasionally are surrounded with raw chaos."
This corruption causes you to be occasionally surrounded by a storm of raw 
chaos.

"You may be corrupted, but you're recovering."
This corruption causes you to slowly become less corrupted, occasionally losing 
a random corruption.

"You fade in and out of physical reality."
This corruption causes you to occasionally take on a ghostly form that can walk 
through walls.

"Your health is subject to chaotic forces."
This corruption causes your wounds to occasionally get better or worse.

"You have a horrible wasting disease."
This corruption causes you to occasionally have one of your abilities damaged.

"You attract dragons."
This corruption causes dragons to occasionally seek you out.

"Your mind randomly expands and contracts."
This corruption causes you to occasionally have ESP.

"You have a seriously upset stomach."
This corruption causes you to occasionally vomit up your food.

"An infernal patron gives you gifts."
Each time you gain a level, you will be given something by your patron.

"You notice when miracles change the world."
This corruption causes you to occasionally notice that the world has changed 
around you.

"You receive warnings about your foes."
This corruption causes you to occasionally be given feelings about how dangerous 
the monsters on your level are.

"You occasionally feel invincible."
This corruption causes you to occasionally become immune to damage for a short 
while.

"Your blood sometimes rushes to your muscles."
This corruption causes you to occasionally lose some spell points and gain hit 
points.

"Your blood sometimes rushes to your head."
This corruption causes you to occasionally lose some hit points and gain spell 
points.

"You occasionally stumble and drop things."
This corruption causes you to occasionally fall over, possibly dropping your 
weapon.

Controlled Corruptions
======================

"You can spit acid."
You can fire a ball of acid.

"You can breathe fire."
You can fire a ball of fire.

"Your gaze is hypnotic."
You can make a monster your friend.

"You are telekinetic."
You can pick up objects from a distance.

"You can teleport at will."
You can teleport to a random place on the level when you choose.

"You can Mind Blast your enemies."
You can fire a bolt of psychic energy.

"You can summon waves of hellslime."
You can fire a ball of hellslime.

"You can drain life from a foe like a vampire."
You can drain hit points from a foe and add them to yourself.

"You can smell nearby precious metal."
You can detect gold and seams of treasure.

"You can smell nearby monsters."
You can detect nearby monsters.

"You can teleport yourself short distances."
You can teleport to a random place within 100' of your current location.

"You can consume solid rock."
You can east a square of wall, removing it and filling you up.

"You can switch locations with another being."
You can teleport to the location of another creature, whilst they simultaneously 
teleport to your location.

"You can emit a horrible shriek."
Your scream inflicts sound damage to all those around you, while aggravating 
those further away.

"You can emit bright light."
You can create a permanent light in your surrounding area.

"You can feel the danger of evil magic."
You can discover which items you are carrying are cursed.

"You can drive yourself into a berserk frenzy."
You can enter a temporary frenzy.

"You can polymorph yourself at will."
You can alter your own form, either to another race or in a corrupting manner.

"You can turn ordinary items to gold."
You can transmute items into gold, getting about a third of the money that 
selling them would get.

"You can cause mold to grow near you."
You can make molds spring up around you that serve as allies.

"You can harden yourself to the ravages of the elements."
You can give yourself temporary resistance to poison, and possibly also to 
electricity, cold, fire and acid.

"You can bring down the dungeon around your ears."
You can cause small earthquakes.

"You can consume magic energy for your own use."
You can drain the magic energy from items that you carry and convert it into 
spell points.

"You can feel the strength of the magics affecting you."
You can get a rough idea of how long durated magic effects on you will last.

"You can cause mass impotence."
You can stop reproducing creatures from breeding.

"You can run for your life after hitting something."
You can make an attack against a creature, and immediately teleport to a random 
location on the level.

"You can emit confusing, blinding lights."
You can stun, confuse and scare nearby creatures.

"Your eyes can fire beams of light."
You can fire beams that do light damage.

"You can travel between town and the depths."
You can teleport to the town, or - if you are already in the town - to the 
deepest level of the dungeon that you have been on.

"You can send evil creatures directly to Hell."
You can teleport evil monsters away, although you get no experience for them if 
you do this.

"You can freeze things with a touch."
You make an attack that does cold damage, although it has no range.

"You can hurl objects with great force."
You can throw objects, and they do more damage than they would normally.
