
====== Object Attributes ======


     All combat methods other than Karate and Wrestling require equipment, and
all benefit greatly from various qualities that your equipped items may possess.
Defence is similarly equipment-dependent.


--- Damage Dice and Plusses ---

Example 1:  A Dagger (1d4) (+6,+4)

Damage Dice:
     All objects have damage dice, which express how much damage they do when
thrown.  For example, if you throw this dagger, it will do 1d4 damage (one die
with four sides).  Melee weapons (like this one) also use their damage dice in
hand-to-hand combat.

Bonus to Skill:
     The dagger above increases melee Skill by 6.  This bonus improves your
chance to strike a monster and the number and quality of critical hits.  Except
for certain rare gloves, armors seldom have bonuses to Skill.  Some have small
penalties.

Bonus to Deadliness:
     The dagger above increases melee Deadliness by 4.  This increases the
damage of every blow you land.  Except for certain rare gloves, armors seldom
have bonuses to Deadliness.


Example 2:  a Pair of Hard Leather Boots [3, +8]

Bonus to Base Armor Class (AC):
     All armors have bonuses to base AC.  The boots shown increase this value by
3.  Some weapons also have bonuses to base armor class, usually because they
help keep monsters further away from you or parry blows.

Bonus, Plus to Armor Class (AC):
     Armor of unusually good quality or that is magical also increases your plus
to AC.  These boots add an additional 8 to AC, giving them a total bonus of 11.
Only rare weapons do the same.



--- Basic object attributes ---

Armor Class:
     Armor Class, or AC, lessens your chances of being hit by any monster blow,
and also reduces the pure damage hits inflict.  AC reduces cutting and stunning
from melee attacks, and your chances of being hit by thrown physical objects
(such as boulders or arrows).  It has no effect on magic.



--- Adjustments to Vital statistics and Abilities ---

Stat Bonuses:
     Any kind of wearable item may affect one or more stats.  See the section on
your character to find out more about what altering a stat does.

Sustain Stats:
     Any kind of wearable item may sustain one or more stats.  This ensures that
the attacks of your foes never lower that stat.

Stealth:
     Certain cloaks, boots, and (more rarely) other items lessen the amount of
noise you make when moving around the dungeon.  This is very handy for avoiding
fights and getting in the first hit.  Stealth also reduces the noise you make in
combat, but the effect is less noticeable.

Awareness:
     Some rings, headgear, and various other items improve your chances to
reveal secret doors and find traps before they find you, allow you to "hear"
unseen monsters near to you, and make it somewhat more likely that you will
successfully pseudo-ID objects.

Infravision:
     Some headgear and (more rarely) other items increase the range at which you
can see warm-blooded creatures, even those that would otherwise be invisible.

Tunneling:
     Some gloves and weapons allow you to dig through rock more effectively.
All special digging tools have a bonus to tunneling.

Speed:
     Boots, rings, and other items that hasten you are rare and powerful, for a
fast player can perform several actions in the time it used to take to do just
one.  Players moving at speed -10 are half as fast as normal, at +10 are twice
as fast as normal, and at +20 are three times as fast as normal.  The maximum
useful speed is (roughly) +35.

Invisibility:
     You can become partially invisible; the greater your invisibility rating,
the more likely it is that most monsters will move about randomly instead of
attacking you.  This is true especially if you stay quiet and do not aggravate
them.  Invisibility from equipment and temporary sources combine, and characters
in and surrounded by pitch darkness are harder to see.  Many monsters, however,
are hard to fool; the undead, invisible creatures, uniques, and hurt, nearby, or
wary monsters are especially watchful.

Disarming:
     Increases your ability to disarm traps and chests and unlock doors.

Devices:
     Certain amulets and gloves improve your chance of using magical devices and
activatable items.  Note that they do not increase damage or enhance effects;
only increasing your Magical Device skill does that.

Save:
     Improves your resistance to magic and various hindrance attacks.

Mana:
     Increases your mana.

Light Radius:
     Pushes your light radius outwards.  Only the best light radius applies.


--- Weapon Attributes ---

Damage bonuses  (only the best applies):
 Slay Evil     :  +10 against evil
 Slay Animal   :  +10 against animals    (weapons of Slaughter Animal get +15)
 Slay Orc      :  +10 against orcs and orc-like creatures
 Slay Troll    :  +18 against trolls
 Slay Giant    :  +18 against giants
 Slay Undead   :  +18 against undead     (weapons of Dispel Undead get +27)
 Slay Demon    :  +18 against demons     (weapons of Smite Demon get +27)
 Slay Dragon   :  +18 against dragons

 Brand Acid    :  +10 against everything not resistant to acid
 Brand Elec    :  +14 against everything not resistant to electricity
 Brand Fire    :  +14 against everything not resistant to fire
 Brand Cold    :  +14 against everything not resistant to cold
 Brand Pois    :  +14 against everything not resistant to poison

 Impact        :  +14 against rocky creatures
 Tunneling     :  +14 against rocky creatures (if bonus to tunneling is >= 1)
 Light         :  +14 against creatures susceptible to light

 Kill Dragon   :  +27 against dragons
 Brand Flame   :  +22 against everything not resistant to fire
 Brand Venom   :  +22 against everything not resistant to poison

Blows:
     Gives you extra melee blows.

Extra Shots:
     Rare missile launchers may allow the player to shoot more quickly than
normal.  Each shot takes a fraction of a turn, making your target appear to move
in slow motion.  Those skilled with bows and slings get innate extra shots.
     The amount of time you take to fire a shot is 200 / shots.  The value for
shots is usually 2, so a shot normally takes 100 energy (one turn).

Extra Might:
     Rare missile launchers have a greater than normal missile damage
multiplier.  For example, a "Sling of Extra Might (x3)" multiplies damage, not
by two like lesser slings, but by three.  The true missile weapon multiplier is
never known for sure until the object is identified.

Throwing:
     A number of weapons can be thrown effectively; you can determine which ones
by 'I'nspecting them.  Such weapons get various bonuses when thrown, but
eventually break if used in melee.

Perfect Balance:
     Some weapons can be thrown with unusual force, adding 50% to the amount of
damage done (before any slay/brand bonuses) should it hit.

Vorpal (Concussive):
     Vorpal (or Concussive) weapons get lots of critical hits, and reduce the
effect of monster resistances.

Blessed:
     Blessed weapons may be used by pious characters without penalty.

Impact:
     Weapons of impact do +14 damage to rocky creatures and will often force
opponents back.

Tunneling:
     Weapons that grant a bonus (at least +1) to tunneling do +14 damage to
rocky creatures.

Light:
     Weapons of permanent light do +14 damage to creatures susceptible to light.

Two-handed Wield Required:
     Glaives, Halberds, Quarterstaff, and all digging tools require two hands to
wield.

Two-handed Wield Desired:
     A fair number of large, powerful weapons must be wielded in two hands
unless the player has amazing strength (normally around 18/130 - 18/160,
depending on weapon weight).


--- Immunities ---

     If you should ever be fortunate enough to find a piece of equipment that
grants immunity to an element, you will take no damage from that element.  Be
warned that immunity does not extend to your backpack; the stuff you are
carrying in inventory can still be destroyed on rare occasions.

Immunity to Acid:
     You take no damage from acid.  Worn items will not be affected by acid.
Staffs, missiles, weapons, armor, and scrolls in your backpack become highly
resistant to destruction.

Immunity to Electricity:
     You take no damage from electricity.  Rings, wands, and rods in your
backpack become highly resistant to destruction.

Immunity to Cold:
     You take no damage from cold.  Potions in your backpack become highly
resistant to destruction.

Immunity to Fire:
     You take no damage from fire.  Spellbooks, scrolls, staffs, and burnable
weapons, missiles, and armor in your backpack become highly resistant to
destruction.


--- Resistances ---

     Resistances from equipment cannot be combined; you either have it or you
don't.

Resist Acid:
     You take one-thirds damage from acid.  Staffs, missiles, weapons, armor,
and scrolls in your backpack become a little more resistant to destruction.
Your equipment is attacked by acid half as often.

Resist Electricity:
     You take one-thirds damage from electricity.  Rings, wands, and rods in
your backpack become a little more resistant to destruction.

Resist Cold:
     You take one thirds damage from cold.  Potions in your backpack become a
little more resistant to destruction.

Resist Fire:
     You take one-thirds damage from fire.  Spellbooks, scrolls, staffs, and
burnable weapons, missiles, and armor in your backpack become a little more
resistant to destruction.

Resist Poison:
     You take one thirds damage from poison.

Resist Light:
     The damage you take from light is reduced.  You cannot be blinded by bright
light.

Resist Darkness:
     The damage you take from darkness is reduced.  You cannot be blinded by
darkness.

Resist Sound:
     The damage you take from sound is reduced.  You cannot be stunned by sound
or by a few other kinds of distance attacks.

Resist Shards:
     The damage you take from blasts of shards is reduced.  You cannot be cut by
shards.

Resist Nexus:
     The damage you take from nexus attacks is reduced.  You cannot be randomly
teleported or altered by nexus, and will sometimes resist being warped around by
gravity.

Resist Nether:
     The damage you take from nether is reduced.  You cannot lose experience to
nether.

Resist Chaos:
     The damage you take from chaos is reduced, and you are immune to all the
nasty things chaos can do to you.  This resistance does not make you resistant
to confusion.

Resist Disenchantment:
     Rarest of all the resistances, this reduces damage from disenchantment
attacks and renders your equipment immune to disenchantment.

Ignore acid, electricity, fire, and cold:
     Some objects cannot be damaged or destroyed by elemental attacks.


--- Survival Attributes ---

Resist Fear:
     Renders you fearless.

Resist Blindness:
     Protects you from being blinded.

Resist Confusion:
     Makes you incapable of being confused.  Also reduces damage from blasts of
confusion.


--- Character Qualities ---

Slow Digestion:
     Reduces your need to consume food.

Feather Fall:
     Renders pit traps and trap doors harmless, makes walking on lava a bit less
dangerous, and reduces some effects of gravity and wind attacks.

Light:
     Some weapons and helms shine with inner light.  Wearing any number of such
objects will increase your illumination radius by one.

Regeneration:
     Players who regenerate recover hitpoints twice as quickly as normal, and
mana 3/2rds as quickly.  They also need to eat more.

Telepathy (ESP):
     It is not easy to acquire this, but players who do can see intelligent
monsters nearby.  Mindless monsters never appear, and semi-intelligent monsters
only appear occasionally.

See Invisible:
     Allows you to see and target monsters invisible to ordinary sight.

Free Action:
     Protects you from paralyzation and most slowing attacks.  Because
paralyzation can instantly kill you, keep an eye out for this important survival
aid.

Hold Life:
     Offers a high degree of protection from attacks (but not items) that lower
skills.

No Fuel:
     Some light sources shine eternally.


--- Curses and other Nastiness ---

Soulsteal:
     Some weapons need to be fed with the blood of your foes.  If they hunger,
and you do not feed them, they will suck away your lifeforce.

No Magic:
     A few objects are so unmagical that you cannot cast spells while using
them.

Random Teleportation:
     Some foul rings, amulets, and boots randomly take control of your movement
and whisk you around the dungeon.

Aggravate:
     Aggravation effectively reduces your stealth to nil, immediately waking up
all monsters nearby.  Some rings and amulets possess curses that aggravate, and
some weapons and armors are so powerful that no creature can ignore them.

Drain Exp:
     Objects that drain experience are perilous, because they slowly but surely
erase your accumulated memories.  Of course, you can keep killing monsters to
replace the experience which you lose.

Hidden Curse:
     Certain rare weapons and armor bear foul magics so well concealed that they
only reveal themselves when you wear the item.  When activated, a hidden curse
hideously transforms the object into something quite dangerous.

Light (ordinary) Curse:
     Many wearable objects have light curses.  A scroll of Remove Curse will
purge all ordinary curses from equipped items.

Heavy Curse:
     The curses on some objects are less easy to remove.  If a ordinary scroll
of Remove Cure fails, find and read one of *Remove Curse*.

Permanent Curse:
     There is a great and terrible Ring, seen by perhaps one character in ten
thousand, that can never be removed once put on.















