=== Welcome to Oangband! ===

This file will tell you how to use the on-line help, explain what Angband is, 
provide a basic understanding of saving and loading games, and get you familiar 
with the essentials of gameplay.  If other help files have more information on 
the current subject, they will be mentioned.


=== Using the Online Help ===

You can press Escape (ESC) at any time to leave the online help.

You can press Question Mark (?) to return to the previous help file.

You can press Space to advance one page, or Return (RET) to advance one line.
If you reach the end of the help file, you will wrap around to the start.

You can press Minus (-) to back up one half page at a time towards the
start of the help file (this is very inefficient).

You can press Pound (#) [or Percent (%)] to go to a specific line [or file].

You can press Slash (/) [or Equals (=)] to search for [or hilite] a string
(case sensitive).  Use "#" + "0" + RET + "/" + RET to restart a search.

Please continue to press Space to view the rest of this file...


=== General Information ===

Oangband is basically a complex single player dungeon simulation.  A player
creates a character, choosing from a variety of sexes, races and classes,
and then "runs" that character over a period of days, weeks, even months.

The player will begin his adventure on the town level where he may acquire
supplies, weapons, armor, and magical devices by bartering with various shop
owners.  Then the player can descend into the Pits of Angband, where he will
explore the many levels of the dungeon, gaining experience by killing fierce
creatures, collecting powerful objects and valuable treasure, and returning
to town occasionally to barter for new supplies.  Eventually, as the player
grows more experienced, he may attempt to win the game by defeating Morgoth,
the Lord of Darkness, who resides far below the surface.


=== Saving and Loading your Game, and Importing Angband Savefiles ===

     Depending on the port of Oangband you are playing, you will have varying 
saving and loading commands available to you.  DOS, IBM, and UNIX versions use 
the commands described in the help file "Commands and their Descriptions", while 
Mactintosh and Windows users use menu options (normally found in the "file" 
menu).  Be warned that the Mactinosh uses preference files to determine where 
saves should go; it may take a little fiddling before you make them appear where 
you want them to.  Also, the Mactintosh saves games using your char's name.     
     If you are playing most ports of Oangband, the game will automatically load 
any savefile named "player" found in <<whatever directory Oangband is in>>
/lib/save/.  Under other systems, the game will wait for you to select a menu 
option (normally found in the "file" menu) and choose a savefile to load.  If 
the character contained in that savefile is dead, you are asked to generate a 
new adventurer (who posesses all the monster memories of the slain hero).  
Otherwise, you continue your game where you left off.
     Angband savefiles may be used in Oangband; a concerted effort has been made 
to retain this capacity.  Because of the many changes between Angband 2.8.3 and 
Oangband, many objects and a few ego-items will be messed up.  Spellbooks are 
a total loss - be warned.  If the transferred adventurer is in the town level, 
he will not be able to enter any stores.  Simply go down into the dungeon and 
back up again to obtain a Oangband-style town.


=== Gameplay basics:  The Novice's Guide ===

NOTE:   In the unlikely event that you are using the roguelike keyset and
still feel the need for a walkthrough, please review the list of commands (in 
the help file on commands), as all commands mentioned are those of the original 
keyset.


     When you (we shall use the second person from now on) begin the game, you 
start out in a town with stores happy to sell you whatever they stock and you 
can afford.  The town is also populated; stay away from rogues and Battle-
scarred Veterans.  Visit the stores and stop by your very own home (the symbol 
'8'), where you can safely stash all sorts of useful gear for later use.
     You are carrying a few objects, which go in logical places on your person
(your equipment) or in your backpack (your inventory).  Look at your 
'i'nventory by typing 'i', and you will see a few items appropriate to your 
character class.  If you have armor, 'w'ear it, if you have a spellbook, 
'b'rowse it, and 'w'ield any weapons and bows you have.  After you have done
this, look at your 'e'quipment by typing 'e', and check out the places that 
gear can fit into.

     Look at the left side of the screen, where all the most important info
about you is displayed.  Reading from the top, you'll see your race, class,
present title, then your experience level, experience points, and money on
hand.  Your race and class never change, but you can gain more experience
points by killing monsters and more gold by selling the loot they drop.
     Next, the six physical statistics.  You already know that higher is 
better, and you can learn more about them by reading the help file "Creating
a character", which is also chock-full of handy info about possible races and 
classes you can play, and your skills and their effects.
     Near the bottom, you will see your armor class, hit points, and (for 
most classes) your spell points.  Armor class shields you from direct damage.  
Hit points are your life wrapped up in a number, so run from anything that 
drops them too low, too fast.  Most classes also have spell points, or 
magical energy that you can put to work by praying or casting spells.

     Get familiar with some of the commands you have available to you, either
by reading the online help file on commands (just the top section), or by 
experimenting, whichever you prefer.  If you experiment, read the file at a 
later date to avoid missing out on important stuff.


--- After this... (assumes a little knowledge of commands) ---

     Okay, time to get playing!  Pick up some flasks of oil, or a sling and some 
shots, and either some armor (If you are a warrior.  Store 2), some arrows (if 
you are a ranger.  Store 1 or 3), or some phase door scrolls (If you are most 
other classes.  Stores 4 or 5).  If you can afford it, get your hands on a 
lantern, because the extra light it provides is very handy. Once you've earned 
a little money, invest in a shovel or a pickaxe, and some potions of Cure Medium 
Wounds.  Now, 'w'ear a torch or your lantern.
     See that down staircase '>'?  It's the entrance to the deadly, lucrative
dungeon.  Head down (Once on top of the staircase, type '>').
     Once you do that, you will find yourself in a dungeon of rooms and corri-
dors.  Since you have already wielded a light source, you can see, even if you
are not in a magically lit room.

     If you are a warrior, check to make certain everything you can wear is on 
you, and go monster-hunting.  If you are any other class, see if you can learn 
any spells (if "study" is visible on the bottom of your screen, you can).  If 
you can, 'G'ain them, and either 'p'ray or use 'm'agic to use them.  Be very 
careful when experimenting with spells, because you haven't many hit points.  
If you can't learn spells, or find that they aren't doing enough damage, 'v' 
(throw) your flasks of oil and 'f'ire your ammo at monsters (make certain you
have a wielded shooter that fires whatever you have).

     Whenever you feel like it, read the help file on attacking and defending 
(it's the handy guide to staying alive and doing damage to your foes).  At some
point, check out the help file about the dungeon to learn more about the town 
and the dungeon, objects you can use, and how to win the game.

And one last note:  Buy a scroll of Recall.  Find out what it does.

Have fun, and keep your eyes peeled for a Phial...
