The Beginner's Guide to Gods and Goddesses

1.  Introduction
        Everybody likes to have a little helping hand now and then.  What
could be better than having a god on your side?  But it's not quite that easy.
The gods won't help just any mortal who calls for help.  You have to give them
a little something too.

2.  How Do I Get in on This?
        First of all, find an altar.  They're found just laying around in the
dungeon.  Then offer a sacrifice.  Make sure you're certain you want to
worship this god, they don't take rejection very well.

3.  So, Who Are These Gods?

Yavanna: The vala in charge of trees, she protects her followers from cold.
Ulmo: The vala of the sea, he can protect the worthy from poison and sound.
Aule: The smith of the vala, associated with earth.  His followers are free to
        move about the earth and will not be harmed by shards of earth.
Melkor:  Yes, this is Morgoth, the guy you're spending the entire game trying
        to whack.  But you can still worship him.  He grants sustains, and
        protects his followers from several dark powers.
Tilion:  Vala of the moon, whose followers need fear neither the dark or the
        creatures that dwell in it.
Arien:  Vala of the sun, whose followers have no fear during the day.
Tulkas:  Vala of rage, his followers are mighty warriors, who cannot be
        deceived in battle.
Manwe:  Vala of the winds, his followers move with supernatural grace and
        swiftness.
Varda:  Vala of the stars, her followers have keen and clear minds.
Eru:  Also known as Illuvatar, he is the creator, the god of being.  Those who
        follow him are granted knowledge beyond that of ordinary mortals, but
        they are so strongly connected to life that it is hard for them to kill
        directly.
The RNG:  The god of chaos, he is as unpredictable and irrational as a high
        school girl.

Any god has the ability to resurrect their followers, if they feel them worthy
of the honor.  But such a gift is only granted rarely, and the gods are
grudgeful of such favors.

4.  How Do I Get on Their Good Side?
	Sacrifice items at their altars.  The more expensive, the better.

5.  I'm in Trouble.  What Do I Do?
        Pray.  Your relationship with your god is measured by two numbers,
your grace and your favor.  Grace is increased by sacrifices, favor is
increased by praying.  Favor is actually a measure of how much you've bothered
your god, so you want it to be as low as possible.  It will slowly decrease
over time.  The chance of your prayer being answered is roughly dependant on
the difference between grace and favor.  Paladins, priests, and priors all
receive a bonus when praying.

6.  My God is Mad.  Help!
        Your grace naturally decreases over time.  If you pray when your grace
is too low, or when your favor is too high, you can find yourself in a lot of
trouble.  The only solution is to rebuild your grace with sacrifices and to
let your favor decrease.

[This spoiler is only guaranteed to be current as of version 4.0.7.  I have no
reason to believe that anything was changed in 4.0.9.  If you wish to contact
the author, write to dustinragan@yahoo.com.  Special thanks go to DarkGod and
to cross11.]
