CELESTIAL
-----------

Celestials are the holy beings that lives in the planes of heaven, 
and represent good and justice. While the greater celestials, such 
as archangels and divine beings rarely descend on the prime material 
planes, prefering to assist the mortals indirectly, the lesser 
messengers of heaven are sometimes sent to the prime material plane 
when evil is rising in power, or to protect a kingdom from
corruption or abuses. These celestials generally ressemble humans, 
but have some special features, generally a glowing aura of light, 
and have large, white angelic wings. Celestials have started to 
appear in Portralis, and yet the reason of their appearance is 
still unknown. Orcs, trolls and ogres have been defeated, there are 
no sign of attacks from the planes of hell, and none of the current 
rulers shows sign of potential corruption. And yet, Celestials have 
been sighted, and are warning the peoples of an incoming threat... 
of a nature that is yet unknown.

Celestials are beings of pure light, and as such can use the element 
of light much better than any other races, and are entirely protected 
from it's effects. However, this also makes them extremely 
vulnerable to the forces of darkness. They are also known to resist 
lightning and wind based attacks, as living high in the heavens have 
made them resistant to the forces of the sky. Celestials are wise and 
charismatic beings, preferring wise advices and diplomatic solutions 
over warfare, but they are capable fighters when the need arise.
They are very good at using Mysticism and Divination magic, as their
divine nature gives them a better connection to the spiritual world
and a better control over the fate of other beings.

CELESTIAL FEATURES:

- +25% to Wisdom.
- +25% to Charisma.
- +25% damages to Light-based attacks and spells.
- +25% to Mysticism and Divination skills.
- 25% resistance to electricity and wind.
- 100% resistance to Light.
- Starts the game with the elemental effect 'Light' learned.

CELESTIAL PENALITIES:

- 100% weakness to Darkness.
