Hermetic Magic
==============

Hermetic magic is the most powerful of the types of magic available in
Cthangband. It is also the most difficult to learn and use. A high
intelligence is essential for a hermetic wizard. Hermetic magic comes
from spells written in books. Casting these spells uses 'Mana' which you
channel using your 'Mana Channeling' skill. The more skill you have, the
more mana you will be able to channel.

Requirements
============

Hermetic spells are difficult to learn and must be studied in peaceful
surroundings. Bookstores set aside an area for study, and new hermetic
spells can be learned there. Only a limited number of spells can be
learned, although this number increases as your 'mana channeling' skill
increases. To cast a spell, you must have your spellbook with you and be
able to read it - so hermetic spells can't be cast in the dark or whilst
blind. You must also have a clear head, so confusion will also prevent
you from casting spells.

Wearing large amounts of armour will interfere with your mana channeling
skill - causing the amount of mana available to you to be reduced, and
wearing any kind of hand covering other than gauntlets of agility or
free action will hinder your hand movements also making it harder to
cast hermetic spells.

Usage
=====

You can use hermetic spells at any time except when in a shop. Press
the 'm' key to cast a spell, and then select which book to cast from and
which spell you wish to cast from the book. Your ability to cast
hermetic spells is rather limited by your circumstances so make sure
that you fulfill all the requirements.

Abilities
=========

Hermetic magic is split into four schools, each of which has four books
full of spells. These schools are Necromancy, Thaumaturgy, Conjuration
and Sorcery. Within each school, individual spells have one of four
types - Naturae spells deal with matter, Animae spells deal with
spirits, Corporis spells deal with flesh and Vis spells deal with raw
power and energy. The spells of each school and book are listed below,
as well as the skill needed to cast each one and its mana cost. The
skill used for each spell is the average of your skills for the school
and the type of the spell - for example, to cast 'Phase Door' from the
sorcery book 'Beginners Handbook' you need an average of 'Sorcery' and
'Corporis' skills of 2%.

Necromancy

Necromancy is the study of the dead and the undead. The spells here deal
with these darker forces.

Black Prayers

Detect Unlife (Animae, 2% Skill, 1 Mana)
This spell will detect all undead that are nearby.

Malediction (Vis, 4% Skill, 2 Mana)
This spell will do damage to a target of your choice, and may confuse,
stun, or otherwise harm it.

Detect Evil (Animae, 4% Skill, 2 Mana)
This spell will detect evil creatures that are nearby.

Stinking Cloud (Naturae, 6% Skill, 3 Mana)
This spell will cast a cloud of poison centered on the target.

Black Sleep (Animae, 10% Skill, 5 Mana)
This spell will try to put a targetted monster to sleep.

Resist Poison (Corporis, 14% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will confer temporary resistance to poison to the caster.

Horrify (Corporis, 18% Skill, 9 Mana)
This spell will frighten and/or stun the targetted monster.

Enslave Undead (Animae, 20% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will attempt to control one targetted undead monster.

Black Mass

Orb of Entropy (Vis, 24% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell will cause a ball of entropy to drain life near a
targetted location.

Nether Bolt (Vis, 26% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell will cast a bolt of nether energy at a targetted creature.

Terror (Animae, 36% Skill, 15 Mana)
This spell will attempt to frighten all monsters in sight.

Vampiric Drain (Corporis, 46% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will drain the life from the target, allowing the player
to heal from and feed on the released energy.

Poison Branding (Naturae, 60% Skill, 75 Mana)
This spell will make a weapon permanently venomous, and may add
enchantments to strike more surely and with greater damage.

Dispel Good (Vis, 66% Skill, 35 Mana)
This spell will inflict damage on all good monsters the caster can see.

Genocide (Corporis, 74% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will banish all creatures of a specified sort from the
current level.

Restore Life (Corporis, 90% Skill, 50 Mana)
This spell will restore all lost skills.

Necronomicon

Berserk (Corporis, 20% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will put the caster into a fighting frenzy.

Invoke Spirits (Animae, 20% Skill, 15 Mana)
This spell will summon undead spirits, which will appear and possibly
do your bidding or will cause other things to happen.

Dark Bolt (Vis, 22% Skill, 11 Mana)
This spell will hurl a bolt of darkness at a target.

Battle Frenzy (Corporis, 60% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will act as Berserk, but will also allow the player to
run very fast.

Vampirism True (Vis, 66% Skill, 35 Mana)
This spell will attempt to drain life force from a targetted creature
to heal the caster.

Vampiric Branding (Naturae, 66% Skill, 90 Mana)
This spell will make a weapon permanently vampiric.

Darkness Storm (Vis, 80% Skill, 40 Mana)
This spell will cause a ball of harmful darkness to appear at a
target.

Mass Genocide (Corporis, 80% Skill, 75 Mana)
This spell will banish nearby creatures from the player.

Kitab Al Azif

Death Ray (Vis, 40% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will fire a ray of death at a targetted monster.

Raise the Dead (Corporis, 50% Skill, 66 Mana)
This spell will raise ancient spirits, who will serve you or punish
you.

Esoteria (Naturae, 60% Skill, 40 Mana)
This spell will give the caster either partial or full knowledge of
any item.

Word of Death (Animae, 66% Skill, 35 Mana)
This spell will cause great harm to living beings within sight of the
caster.

Evocation (Vis, 74% Skill, 35 Mana)
This spell will cause monsters to turn away or disappear.

Hellfire (Vis, 84% Skill, 120 Mana)
This spell will create a ball of hellfire around a targetted point or
creature.  Its backlash will hurt the caster.

Omnicide (Corporis, 90% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell will banish all monsters except uniques and quest guardians,
hurting the caster but helping refresh his or her mana.

Wraithform (Corporis, 94% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell will give the caster the ability to walk through walls for
a time.

Conjuration

Conjuration magic is the magic of movement. It specialises in spells
that both move yourself and summon other creatures to do your bidding.

Minor Conjurings

Phase Door (Corporis, 2% Skill, 1 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a short distance.

Mind Blast (Animae, 6% Skill, 3 Mana)
This spell will fire a psychic blast at a targetted creature, exposing
their minds to the harmful effects of other planes.

Tarot Draw (Vis, 10% Skill, 5 Mana)
This spell allows you to invoke the power of the tarot deck and draw a
card for a random effect.

Reset Recall (Animae, 12% Skill, 6 Mana)
This spell resets the depth to which you will teleport to when you next
use the 'Word of Recall' spell to enter your current dungeon.

Teleport (Corporis, 14% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a long distance.

Dimension Door (Naturae, 18% Skill, 9 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a short distance, but you will be able to
choose your destination.

Planar Spying (Vis, 28% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell allows you to see into the astral plane and notice the
spirits of intelligent creatures that are nearby, giving you telepathy
for a short while.

Teleport Away (Corporis, 34% Skill, 15 Mana)
This spell will teleport the targetted creature away from you in a
random direction.

Conjuring Mastery

Summon Object (Narurae, 40% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will teleport a nearby object that you can see into your
hand.

Summon Animal (Animae, 48% Skill, 22 Mana)
This spell will summon an animal to serve you.

Phantasmal Servant (Vis, 56% Skill, 24 Mana)
This spell will summon a phantasmal creature from the planes of illusion
to serve you.

Summon Monster (Animae, 60% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will summon a random monster to serve you.

Conjure Elemental (Naturae, 66% Skill, 28 Mana)
This spell will summon an elemental creature to serve you.

Teleport Level (Corporis, 70% Skill, 30 Mana)
This spell will teleport you randomly up or down within your current
dungeon.

Word of Recall (Corporis, 80% Skill, 35 Mana)
This spell will teleport you either back to the town or back down into
the dungeon, depending on where it is cast from. It takes a while to
work, so you should not expect to teleport straight away.

Banish (Animae, 84% Skill, 40 Mana)
This spell will teleport all nearby monsters away from you in random
directions.

Book of Eibon

Joker Card (Vis, 30% Skill, 15 Mana)
This spell will summon a strange creature to serve you.

Summon Spiders (Animae, 48% Skill, 24 Mana)
This spell will summon one or more spiders to serve you.

Summon Reptiles (Animae, 52% Skill, 26 Mana)
THis spell will summon one or more reptiles to serve you.

Summon Hounds (Animae, 60% Skill, 30 Mana)
This spell will summon one or more elemental zephyr hounds to serve you.

Planar Branding (Vis, 70% Skill, 70 Mana)
This spell will make your weapon exist multidimensionally, giving it a
variety of special powers.

Planar Being (Corporis, 80% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell pulls you partially out of the normal plane, enhancing your
ability to move around.

Death Dealing (Vis, 84% Skill, 50 Mana)
This spell allows you to use your Tarot deck to drain the life out of
nearby creatures.

Summon Reaver (Animae, 90% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell summons a black reaver to serve you.

Liber Ivonis

Planar Divination (Animae, 60% Skill, 30 Mana)
This spell shows you all items, features and creatures in the area
around you.

Planar Lore (Animae, 70% Skill, 50 Mana)
This spell allows you to contact a higher being for detailed knowledge
about an item.

Summon Undead (Animae, 72% Skill, 80 Mana)
This spell summons one or more undead to serve you.

Summon Dragon (Animae, 78% Skill, 80 Mana)
This spell summons a dragon to serve you.

Mass Summons (Animae, 84% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell summons many random creatures to serve you.

Summon Demon (Animae, 94% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell summons a powerful demon to serve you.

Summon Ancient Dragon (Animae. 96% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell summons a powerful dragon to serve you.

Summon Greater Undead (Animae, 98% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell summons one of the most powerful of the undead to serve you.

Thaumaturgy

Thaumaturgy is the magic of chaos and destruction. The chaos gods take a
particular interest in anyone learning thaumaturgy magic and will
encourage such learning by giving gifts to the student - although such
gifts are not always welcome, but that is the nature of chaos.

Sign of Chaos

Magic Missile (Naturae, 2% Skill, 1 Mana)
This spell will create a missile and fire it through the air at a
targetted creature.

Trap / Door Destruction (Naturae, 2% Skill, 2 Mana)
This spell will destroy any doors or traps that you are standing next
to.

Flash of Light (Vis, 4% Skill, 2 Mana)
This spell will illuminate the area around you.

Touch of Confusion (Animae, 10% Skill, 5 Mana)
This spell will make your hands and weapon glow with an aura that will
confuse the next creature that you hit.

Mana Burst (Vis, 18% Skill, 6 Mana)
This spell will create a magical explosion of force centred on the
creature or location that you target.

Fire Bolt (Vis, 26% Skill, 9 Mana)
This spell will shoot a bolt of fire at a targetted creature.

Fist of Force (Vis, 28% Skill, 9 Mana)
This spell will fire a ray of pure force that will shatter anything it
hits.

Teleport Self (Corporis, 30% Skill, 9 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a long distance.

Chaos Mastery

Wonder (Vis, 34% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will channel chaos at a targetted creature or location with a
random effect,

Chaos Bolt (Vis, 38% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell will fire a bolt of raw chaos at a targetted creature.

Sonic Boom (Vis, 42% Skill, 13 Mana)
This spell will cause a ball of sound to explode around you, damaging
any nearby creatures.

Doom Bolt (Vis, 46% Skill, 15 Mana)
This spell will fire a lance of magic in the targetted direction that
will pass through creatures, damaging all that it touches.

Fire Ball (Vis, 50% Skill, 16 Mana)
This spell will cause a large ball of flame to explode centred on the
targetted creature or location.

Teleport Other (Corporis, 50% Skill, 18 Mana)
This spell will teleport a targetted creature away from you in a random
direction.

Word of Destruction (Animae, 60% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will cause the area around you to collapse, harming anything
that gets trapped.

Invoke Chaos (Naturae, 70% Skill, 40 Mana)
This spell will shoot a ball of raw chaos that will explode at the
targetted location.

The King in Yellow

Polymorph Other (Corporis, 22% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will magically change the targetted creature into something
else.

Chain Lightning (Vis, 30% Skill, 15 Mana)
This spell will fire eight lightning bolts out in a ring around you.

Arcane Binding (Naturae, 32% Skill, 14 Mana)
This spell will recharge a staff, rod or wand.

Disintegrate (Naturae, 50% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will create a cloud of disintegration affecting an area
centred around the targetted location.

Alter Reality (Animae, 60% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will shift you into an alternate universe, similar to the
current one but slightly different.

Polymorph Self (Corporis, 84% Skill, 50 Mana)
This spell will change your species to a random one.

Chaos Branding (Naturae, 90% Skill, 90 Mana)
This spell will bind chaos into your weapon, causing it to have
unpredictable effects on things that it hits.

Summon Demon (Animae, 94% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell will summon a demon from the courts of chaos to be your ally.

The Revelations of Glaaki

Beam of Gravity (Naturae, 40% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will fire a beam of gravity at the targetted creature,
pulling it apart.

Meteor Swarm (Naturae, 70% Skill, 32 Mana)
This spell will cause a number of meteors to rain down in the area
around you causing great damage.

Flame Strike (Vis, 74% Skill, 34 Mana)
This spell will cause a massive burst of flame to appear at the
targetted location.

Call Chaos (Vis, 82% Skill, 42 Mana)
This spell will fire random elemental balls and bolts around you.

Shard Ball (Naturae, 86% Skill, 44 Mana)
This spell will fire a missile to the targetted location, where it will
explode into a ball of shards and shrapnel.

Mana Storm (Vis, 90% Skill, 48 Mana)
This spell will create a huge explosion of raw magic at the targetted
location.

Breathe Chaos (Corporis, 94% Skill, 75 Mana)
This spell will cause you to breathe raw chaos over the targetted
location.

Call the Void (Animae, 98% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell will fill the area around you with shards of metal, magical
energies and toxic gasses.

Sorcery

Beginner's Handbook

Detect Monsters (Animae, 2% Skill, 1 Mana)
This spell will detect any monsters that are nearby.

Phase Door (Corporis, 2% Skill, 2 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a short distance.

Detect Doors and Traps (Naturae, 6% Skill, 3 Mana)
This spell will show you any secret doors, stairs or traps that are
nearby.

Light Area (Vis, 6% Skill, 3 Mana)
This spell will illuminate the area around you.

Confuse Monster (Animae, 8% Skill, 4 Mana)
This spell will fire a dazzling bolt at the targetted creature,
confusing it briefly.

Teleport (Corporis, 10% Skill, 5 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a long distance.

Sleep Monster (Animae, 12% Skill, 5 Mana)
This spell will fire a sleep ray at a targetted monster.

Recharging (Vis, 14% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will repower a wand, staff or rod.

Master Sorcerer's Handbook

Magic Mapping (Naturae, 18% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will give you a magical vision of the area around you.

Identify (Naturae, 20% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will show you the major powers of a magical item.

Slow Monster (Corporis, 22% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will fire a beam at a targetted monster, slowing its movement
down greatly.

Mass Sleep (Animae, 26% Skill, 7 Mana)
This spell will send a wave of fatigue around you, causing any nearby
monsters to fall asleep.

Teleport Away (Corporis, 36% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell will teleport a targetted creature away from you in a random
direction.

Haste Self (Corporis, 44% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell will greatly speed up your movement for a short while.

Detection True (Animae, 56% Skill, 20 Mana)
This spell will make you aware of all items, creatures and other dungeon
features that are nearby.

Identify True (Naturae, 66% Skill, 30 Mana)
This spell will show you all the powers and abilities of an object.

R'Lyeh Text

Detect Objects & Treasure (Naturae, 6% Skill, 3 Mana)
This spell will show you all objects and precious things that are
nearby.

Detect Enchantment (Vis, 20% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will show you any sources of magic that are nearby.

Charm Monster (Animae, 20% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will beguile a targetted creature, making it become your
ally.

Dimension Door (Naturae, 24% Skill, 12 Mana)
This spell will teleport you a short distance, allowing you to choose
your destination.

Sense Minds (Animae, 28% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will bestow you with telepathy for a short while.

Self Knowledge (Animae, 40% Skill, 18 Mana)
This spell will give you magical knowledge about yourself and your
abilities.

Teleport Level (Corporis, 40% Skill, 18 Mana)
This spell will teleport you randomly up or down within the dungeon that
you are currently exploring.

Word of Recall (Corporis, 50% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will teleport you back up to the town, or back down into the
dungeon. It takes a while to kick in however, so you will not teleport
straight away.

Unausprechlichen Kulten

Stasis (Vis, 20% Skill, 10 Mana)
This spell will fire a paralysing ray at a monster, freezing it for a
while.

Telekinesis (Naturae, 50% Skill, 25 Mana)
This spell will grab an object from the floor and make it fly to your
hand.

Explosive Rune (Vis, 50% Skill, 30 Mana)
This spell inscribes a rune by your feet that will explode if anyone
other than yourself steps on it.

Clairvoyance (Naturae, 60% Skill, 40 Mana)
This spell will magically light up the entire area that you are
exploring and give you telepathy for a short while.

Enchant Weapon (Vis, 80% Skill, 80 Mana)
This spell will magically increase the effectiveness of your weapon.

Enchant Armour (Vis, 80% Skill, 100 Mana)
This spell will magically increase the effectiveness of your armour.

Alchemy (Naturae, 84% Skill, 50 Mana)
This spell will turn an object into gold.

Globe of Invulnerability (Animae, 90% Skill, 70 Mana)
This spell will make you almost invulnerable to damage for a short
while.
