MAGIC ITEMS TYPES/COLORS DESCRIPTIONS
---------------------------------------

When you pickup items in your inventory, some of them may appear with a name
colored differently that the usual color of the item. For example, weapons
usually are white, but you will soon come across purple colored ones, meaning
it's a magic item. Here are the colors explained:

PURPLE: Magic Item

A magic item. Purple items carry enchantments that can give you various bonus,
which you can learn about by using the 'I' command, assuming the item is
identified. They may also have enhanced base values, such as increased damages
or AC. Purple items can sometimes be found randomly in dungeons, but are mostly
dropped by elite and boss monsters, as well as powerful Uniques. You will find
a lot of magic items if you defeat elites and bosses! They can also be found
in the black market. If you find one that you don't want, try selling it, as
they sell for a better price than regular items. As you explore deeper levels,
magic items will become progressively better, so you should look for them!

BLUE: Levelable Item

Blue items are similar to purples, except for one significant advantage: they
can gain levels. Blue items have some customizable "tweak" points that you
can use to increase the item's abilities. A blue item will start with 2 tweak
points, and will gain 2 extra ones for every levels. It's base damages and
base AC, as well as to_hit and to_dam bonus will increase as well.
You can level up a blue item by defeating enemies, but they must have a level
equal or higher than yours, and their depth level must be equal or higher to
the current item's level. You will see a "kills" property on levelable items,
showing the number of enemies you need to kill before gaining a level.
You will quickly find out that levelable items are much, much, much more
powerful than regular magic items, and as you progress in the game, you will
most likely want to wear a full set of these levelable items. Of course,
obtaining them may not be easy, but it's well worth it. Leveling up your
items is the key to creating an extremely powerful character!

Blue items are rarer than normal magic items, and are not found until around
dungeon levels 20 and lower, although it is possible to find one early if you
are very lucky, or use a scroll of item leveling. Some special vaults may also
hide some levelable items.

YELLOW: Artifact

These are artifacts. Artifacts ranges from uncommon to very rare, and many
are obtained after completing quests or are hidden in dungeon vaults.
Needless to say, rare artifacts tends to have unique properties not found
on any other kind of items, and many can gain experience levels. All artifacts
are eternal, meaning you will not lose them if you die. They are generally
a lot more powerful than regular magic items, and often have a theme that
suits particular characters very well. Always be on the look for artifacts!

Tip: The rare item shops sells scrolls of Item Leveling. Use these scrolls
to make any artifacts into a levelable one!

ORANGE: Enchanted Crafted Item

Orange items are created using the Crafting skill. Initially, crafted items
will be normal items, but as soon as you increase their abilities, they
will become orange, meaning it's an enchanted crafted item. The Enchanter
class has many ways to put these items to good use! Note that these items
can never become levelables, and that scrolls of Item Leveling will not
work on them.

GREEN: Special Item

Special items are incredibly powerful magic items. They are always eternal,
always levelable, and boast powers unlike any other kind of items. The only
problem is that they are incredibly rare, and it may take a very long time
before you find one, if ever. If you DO find one, it will most likely outclass
most of your other items, and you will definitely want to put it to good use.

Notes:

Specials will usually not appear before at least dungeon level 40 and
deeper. Even then, they are incredibly rare, and it may take a very long
time before you ever see one, if you ever do. It is best not to spend too
much time killing enemies over and over looking for them, as they might
not appear, and you'll get bored. Just play, and rejoice if one shows up! :)

RED: Cursed Item

"Nightmares and misfortune sleep within..."

This is probably the ability you've noticed after identifying a red item.
You probably also noticed that it is very powerful. Indeed, cursed items
are very powerful, however, the curse they carry will bring bad luck to you.
Using or even just carrying a cursed item is enough to trigger it's side
effects, and the higher the misfortune level, the worst they are.
Each cursed item you carry increase your misfortune level, so the more you
carry, the worse it gets!

The side effects are the following:
- An increase of Elite and Boss monsters.
- A decrease in the quality of non-cursed magic items.

However:
- Cursed items are very powerful. The higher the misfortune level, the more
power they have. They are also always eternal.
- No side effects in special quest levels, meaning they are good to use to
complete quests.
- Cursed items can usually sell for a very nice price.

So consider all this before you decide whether or not you want to use cursed
items. They have great power, but there is a price to pay.

If it's not already levelable, use a Scroll of Item Leveling on them.
You'll find that levelable cursed items can become *VERY* powerful.

Notes:

Cursed items usually do not appear before depths 10 and lower, and even then
you probably won't find them before 20. Carrying cursed items increases the
chance of finding more of them.

It is possible that cursed items might have another side effect...
