ZULGOR
--------

Some extremely rare humans are born with a very strange power... 
The first sign of this mysterious power is a strange hair and eyes 
coloration, generally made of two different bright colors, and strange, 
distorting feeling to anyone who approaches them. These peoples, 
while looking like ordinary peoples, are actually extremely 
strong, and can lift unelievable weight. Even those that do not look 
strong at all possess strength greater than that of ten dwarves. 
Furthermore, these peoples use unusual type of magics with great skill, 
magics that are often distorting and disruptive. Some researchers 
claims that these peoples are zulgors, mythic beings with bodies made 
of chaotic force, and said to have legendary strength and the power to 
alter every aspects of reality. Some claims the zulgors are just legends, 
other claims they are powerful demons or spirits... Nevertheless, the 
mysterious powers of these "zulgors" is a great mystery, and little is 
known at all about the zulgors...

Whether they are real zulgors, or aren't related to the zulgors at all, 
these peoples are unbelievably strong, and have great mastery of the element 
of Chaos, as well as complete immunity to it, something extremely unusual, 
even amongst magical beings of any kind. But having legendary strength does 
have it's drawbacks. Normal weapons just aren't made for them, as they aren't 
strong enough to resist the tremendous impact the blows of a zulgor delivers. 
As a result, they tend to break very easily. Also, due to their body being 
impregnated with chaos, possibly even made of pure chaos, it seems no matter 
what element they try to invoke, it turns out into a chaotic force...

ZULGOR FEATURES:

- +100% Strength.
- +25% damages to Chaos-based attacks and spells.
- 100% resistance to Chaos.
- Starts the game with the elemental effect 'Chaos' learned.

ZULGOR PENALITIES:

- Non-indestructible weapons will lose durability very quickly.
- All non-physical attacks, spells and abilities will turn into Chaos. This includes
branded weapons, rods, spells, abilities, etc...
