MONSTER
---------

One of the numerous monsters that lives in dungeons, caves, etc...
Playing this race is a completely different gameplay experience from
the regular races, and it may not be a good choice if you are a
beginner and it's your first time trough the game.

THE MONSTER RACE
------------------

The 'Monster' race lets you incarnate a monster, but you do not get to
change your class. Instead, you use the creature's natural abilities
instead of learning abilities or creating spells. When using a monster's 
natural attacks, your Martial Arts skill is used to improve the damages.
Pay attention to your attacks strength, they make a huge difference.
There are hundreds, perhaps thousands of creatures to choose from.
Some are stronger, some are weaker. Note that unlike the Monster Mage's 
morphing abilities, you will NEVER get returned damages if you use an 
elemental natural melee attack on a magic returning boss.

Many monsters also offers spells, such as bolts, balls,
summon spells and support magic. Spellcraft skill will improve
the damages of these magical attacks.

Monsters also have access to three passive abilities where you can
spend your earned abilities points. Here are the benefits of the
abilities for every points you place in them.

IMPROVED ATTACK: +2 to Martial Arts skill
		 +5 to_hit

IMPROVED DEFENSE: +10% natural AC to base AC(based on monster's natural AC)
		  +2 to base AC
		  +10 to_ac

IMPROVED MAGIC: +10% spells damages.


Monsters can be hard to play, and how you build your character will
greatly depend on the kind of monster you chose. If you have chosen
to play a weaker monster kind, It's up to you to choose what works 
best for you, and it all depends on the monster you incarnate.

EVOLVING
----------

Once you fight a few fights, you will notice that your monster
probably isen't a match for the stronger monsters anymore. You can
then use the Monster's Evolve ability, which allow you to turn into
a more powerful monster of the same kind. To evolve, use the 'Y'
command like you would to change your class normally.
That way, you could rise from a Baby Red Dragon to a Young Red Dragon.
You will never be able to change your basic kind, so if you start as
a giant('P'), you will always be a giant. There are two exceptions
however. A lesser dragon('d') can turn into an ancient dragon('D'),
while a lesser demon('u') can turn into a greater demon('U'). When
using the Evolve ability, you will be able to select a monster with
a depth equal or lower than your current level that is the same kind
of you.

TIPS
------

When first playing as a monster, choose your kind wisely. For
beginners, lesser dragon('d') is an obvious choice, as it will
offer you a great mix of melee and magic power, and a good amount
of hp. Later, you will be able to evolve into the more powerful
Ancient Dragons('D'), which stands amongst the strongest monsters
in the game. More experienced players might like the physically
oriented golems('g'), or the physical immune ghost('G'). Humans('p')
will offer a good, varied choice too.

Choosing a good monster race at the beginning is crucial to your
success, and therefore a first run with another race is recommanded
to learn more about the various races of monsters.
