=== Kangband 2.9.3 ===

This file contains basic information about Kangband.  Unfortunately,
earlier versions of Kangband did not include similar documents so this
is somewhat sketchy in places. Anyone who is able to contribute further
information or insight is not only welcome but actively encouraged to
do so.


=== Standard Angband 2.9.3 vs. Kangband 2.9.3 ===

The main differences between Angband 2.9.2 and Kangband 2.9.3 are
as follows:

- Kangband introduces an extended town level which includes additional
  terrain features (such as grass, trees, mountains, lakes and rivers)
  and additional buildings which provide services rather than sell
  goods. Each building and its services are themed and the prices the
  player will pay for those services will vary based upon how their
  character's race and class fits into this theme.

- Kangband also introduces the idea of a "plot". Each character must
  choose a "plot" which will determine which quests he will undertake.
  Quests may take several forms including requiring the player to
  enter special, non-random dungeon levels.  There are various quest
  objectives including killing all monsters or a certain number of a
  specific type of monster, retrieving an object (or objects) and
  locating an exit. The player will generally receive a reward for
  completing a quest.

- Kangband introduces new terrains into the dungeon. You may come
  across rivers of water and lava (of varying depths) and, at shallow
  levels, plantations of trees. Crossing these terrains poses certain
  problems for both players and monsters. Fog mists may also be found
  on certain levels.

- Kangband introduces several new monsters and items.  These are taken
  from a variety of sources including other variants.  There are also
  many monsters and items that are unique to Kangband.

- Kangband includes four new player races - Kobolds, Maia, Ents and
  Wraiths.  Kobolds make reasonable fighters and resist poison
  intrinsically. Maia are intended to be a training race for
  inexperienced players and are highly skilled, have excellent stats,
  gain levels quickly and recover quickly when their hitpoints and
  spell points are depleted. Ents are physically strong but are poor
  at resisting fire-based attacks.  Wraiths make excellent spellcasters
  and come with an impressive set of intrinsic abilities but aggravate
  monsters around them.

- Kangband introduces the Illusionist and Druid classes.  Illusionists
  specialise in illusion and misdirection (and are similar to mages in
  most other respects).  Druids are close to nature, are skilled in
  controlling animals and are able to change the surrounding terrain
  at their will.  Druids are similar to priests. Both these classes get
  new and interesting attack and utility spells.

- Traditional mages and priests in Kangband have had a reworking to
  reduce dependancy on melee and to make them play more in character.
  Rogues use the Illusion books rather than the mage's books.

- Kangband introduces temporary resistance to most of the "high"
  resistances (light, dark, sound, shards, confusion, chaos, nexus and
  nether). These work in much the same way as the temporary "low"
  resistances do.

- Kangband also introduces levitation, invisibility and "ghostliness"
  in both permanent and temporary forms which allow the player to
  levitate, become invisible and walk through non-permanent walls
  respectively while in effect.



=== Imported Ideas ===

While much of what makes Kangband different from Angband was pioneered
by Kangband's author and maintainers, it has also adopted numerous
features from other variants. Of particular note are the following:

From GWAngband (by Greg Wooledge)
---------------------------------
The Kobold race and numerous minor changes to the combat code, the
magic code and the mage and priest spell lists. Many of the combat
changes were reversed in later versions of Kangband.

From Zangband (by Topi Ylinen and Robert Ruehlmann)
---------------------------------------------------
Various spells and vaults. The extended town and quest code developed
originally by Ken Wigle for Kangband was imported into Zangband and
then extended and refined. This refined code was imported back into
Kangband in version 2.9.2.  Pet AI and commands.

From Kamband (by Ivan Tkatchev)
-------------------------------
Much of the code for special buildings (later replaced by that from
Zangband) and code for better handling of pet summoning.

From Psiband (by ??)
--------------------
Pet targetting code.


=== Version History (by John I'anson-Holton) ===

The original Kangband was produced by Ken Wigle who went on to release
several follow-up versions through to Kangband 2.8.3i. At that point
real life concerns forced Ken to step down and Mark Howson took over
as Kangband's maintainer.  Mark released version 2.8.3j which was
primarily a bugfix (and later a patch to that version) and then
anounced the 2.8.3 branch to be dead.

With the help of Ken Wigle and others, Mark then embarked on an
ambitious project for Kangband 3.0.0 which was to use Python to extend
the C core and introduce major new features.  Unfortunately version
3.0.0 never went beyond alpha testing and when Real Life claimed Mark
Howson too Kangband was left dormant for eight months.

At that point I volunteered to take over and, in the absence of more
qualified candidates, Mark Howson agreed.  I have had to reluctantly
admit that I am not up to the task of continuing with 3.0.0 and so the
future of Kangband for the time being lies in the old 2.8.3 branch.
Version 3.0.0 is not dead but it will remain dormant for the time
being.

My first step as maintainer was to release Kangband 2.9.1. This
release contained no new features and instead was simply a code base
update which reflected changes made in the Angband code since 2.8.3jp1
was released. Version 2.9.1r1 was released a week or so later and was
essentially a bugfix although certain game mechanics did undergo some
minor modification.

Version 2.9.2 was the first version I released which introduced major
change to Kangband although was largely transparent to the player.  It
included several more bugfixes and minor game mechanics changes (see
changes.txt for details) but contained a major reworking of the town,
building and quest handling resulting in a far more powerful (if
somewhat esoteric) system.

Version 2.9.3 introduced further refinements to the quest system as
well as including four new plots that were previously avaialable only
as add-ins (or as part of the KangbandTk variant of Kangband) as well
as several other chamges inherent in the codebase update to standard
Angband 2.9.3.

My vision of the future of Kangband is to keep the code base as close
to Standard Angband as possible while continuing to develop Kangband
along its current lines. What this means for the immediate future is
a reworking of the magic realms according to my own tastes and a move
in the monster lists closer to Tolkien. I will also be making an
ongoing effort to increase ease of customization and will be adding 
features of my own design and from other variants that are in keeping
with Kangband's spirit.