
     Saving and loading your character should be easy.  So, sadly, 
is getting him killed.  Winning is a little harder, but the 
novice player can take advantage of various cheats to improve 
his chances down in the dungeon.


--- Saving your Game ---

     Saving your game is usually easy.  You can use the save game command, or
(on some systems) a menu option.  The game is auto-saved whenever you enter
a new level.  If you cannot save your game, you probably
have one of two problems:
1) The folder "<<game>>/lib/save" does not exist.  Create this directory and
   any others that are missing.
2) You are using a multi-user machine and do not have write permission to
   that file or directory.


--- Loading your Game ---


Macintosh, Windows:
     You choose the menu option "file -> open", which allows you to load
savefiles from almost any directory.  With suitable use of option files, the
Macintosh can also save to almost any directory.

Loading dead characters:
     If you load a dead character, the game will start up with the character
birth interface.  The new character inherits the monster knowledge of his
ancestor.

Savefile compatibility report:
     NPPAngband 7.0.0 and NPPMoria 7.0.0 break savefile compatbility.,  
     NPPAngband 0.4.0 breaks savefile compatability. NPP 0.5.4 loads 0.4.0 savefiles.
     NPPAngband 0.3.4 and before loads files from Angband 2.9.0 and later.  To use earlier
savefiles, import it into Angband 2.9.3, resave, and then open it up with the
current version.


--- Winning The Game ---

     The Balrog of Moria can be found at adepth of 2500' or greater.  Kill it to 
win the game.

     The Balrog of Moria cannot be killed by some of the easier methods used on normal
creatures.  The Balrog, like all other unique monsters, will simply teleport away
to another region of the level if you attempt to use a spell such as destruction
upon him.  He also cannot be polymorphed or genocided.  

     If you should actually survive the attempt of killing the Balrog, you will
receive the status of WINNER.  You may continue to explore, and may even save
the game and play more later, but since you have defeated the toughest creature
alive, there is really not much point.  Unless you wish to listen to the rumours
of a powerful ring buried somewhere in the dungeon...

     When you are ready to retire, simply "commit suicide" (using the "Q" key)
to have your character entered into the high score list as a winner.  Note that
until you retire, you can still be killed, so you may want to retire before
wandering into a room with 95 Death Molds crammed inside...


--- Upon Death and Dying ---

     If your character's hit points fall below zero, he dies.  The dreaded
tombstone will appear, and you may check out his attributes and possessions one
last time.

     Your character will leave behind a reduced save file, which contains only
the monster memory and your option choices, both of which new characters may
use.  It is very helpful to know something about the monster that slew your
ancestor!


--- Cheating Death ---

     One of the most important things about this game is that your character's
life is so important.  Let him die, and you start over from scratch.  This is
one of the secrets to this game's fascination; anyone who cheats death is really
not getting the full experience, and any Morgoth-slayers yanked from the jaws of
death are not full winners.  But what if your characters seem to die all the
time (like mine!), and you really want to keep playing with the same guy?  Well,
the game has a few answers for that too.  You may cheat death by:

     - Toggling on the "cheat death" option.  This keeps your character ticking,
       and is even kind enough to give you a running tally of your deaths by
       setting the character's age to zero when first used, and increasing it by
       one each time thereafter.  Trying to keep this number low is a great way
       to learn the game.
     - Making backup savefiles.
     - Aborting the game just as the tombstone appears or before.
