
====== Objects ======

     The mines far below the surface are full of objects just waiting to be
picked up and used.  The treasures of long-forgotten kingdoms, dragon's hordes,
heirlooms, wizard's stashes, and the plunder from every age of the world unite
with the scattered earthly possessions of all the foolish adventurers who died
before you to offer unimaginable wealth for those bold enough to seize it.


--- Learning about objects ---

Learning about objects:
     When you begin the game, most objects are unknown to you, and an important
task is to learn more about them so that you can use them reliably.  The
standard way to learn about an object is to identify it, but scrolls of Identify
and Staffs of Perception are too expensive to use on everything.

Full identification:
     Some items have special powers.  Ego-item descriptions usually tell you
everything.  You can also try using the object a lot and inscribing it.

Scanning wargear automatically (Pseudo-ID):
     Every so often, you automatically scan un-identified wargear (weapons and
armour).  If you learn something, the item is inscribed.

     Item description               weak sensing            strong sensing
     average item:                  (item is identified)    (item is identified)
     item with plusses              "good"                  "good"
     ego-item (weapon of flame)     "good"                  "excellent"
     cursed ego-item                "cursed"                "worthless"
     cursed ordinary object         "cursed"                "cursed"


--- Object information ---

     'I'nspecting a specific object will pop up a special display that may tell
you useful things about it.  If the item is fully identified, you see all of its
attributes.
     Known attributes of equipped items are displayed in the character screen
display (type 'C' to bring up the character screen, then press '+/-' to cycle
through the information).  This interface is helpful when you want to optimize
your equipment.


--- Inventory, quiver and equipment ---

Your inventory (backpack), quiver, and equipment (your person):
     You pick up objects by moving on top on them or staying still (if you have
the "auto_pickup" option on), or by using various pickup commands.  You
may carry up to 23 different items or piles of items,, and have 12 areas of your
body where wearable equipment may go.  Press 'i', and you see the contents of
your backpack; press 'e' and you see what you are wearing.  Both listings toggle
open and closed when you press the space key.  
     When choosing items, you switch between inventory and equipment by pressing
'/', and switch between the floor and either of these two by pressing '-'.

Burden:
     Carry too much weight, and you will begin to slow down, making it easier
for monsters to kill you.  The point at which your load thus hinders you depends
on your strength.  You begin to slow down at 50% of your max carrying capacity.

Floor items:
     If objects are allowed to stack (which they are by default), up to 23
objects or piles of objects may stack in a single floor grid.

Quiver:
     Your equipment also has a quiver, which may hold up to ten different kinds
of ammo or throwing weapons. You have to 'w'ield your ammo and a proper missile 
launcher in order to use the quiver. Ammo is shot with the 'f'ire command and 
it's usually sorted like the inventory. The quiver occupies pack space and 
every 99 missiles it will consume one inventory slot.
     To speed up shooting, the game gives a pseudo-tag to each quiver slot.
This pseudo-tag is shown before the ammo's name when you browse your equipment
and usually appears as "f0", "f1", etc. When the 'f'ire command asks you to
choose an ammo slot you can type the number which appears in the pseudo-tag
instead of the slot label.
     Ammo in NPPMoria is divided in three groups: ammo for crossbows, bows
and slings. Each group has a different set of pseudo-tags, each one starting
from "f0". This allows you to easily change your missile launcher without
having to reorganize your quiver or reinscribe ammo.
     Players who use macros will find this useful:
You can give ammo a specific pseudo-tag by using inscriptions like {@1}, {@f1},
{@f9}, etc. It means that the pseudo-tag will be fixed and it won't change when
the quiver is reorganized (example: when you shot a whole stack of ammo or
when you wield new ammo) Fixed pseudo-tags appears as "@f1", "@f7", etc.
     Players who use the CTRL-V command (repeat last command) instead of macros
to deal with shooting will note that the 'f'ire command is more careful now and
it doesn't use the next slot automatically when a whole stack of ammo is shot.
     You'll notice that ammo on the floor is automatically wielded if it has
been fired from, or can be merged with ith existing ammo in the quiver. 
     

--- Object types ---

Magical devices:
     Wands and staves stack, and don't unstack when used.

Chests:
     Chests are difficult and dangerous to open, as they usually contain both
traps and locks.  They can be safely opened after using a disarming spell 
on them.  If you succeed, you may be rewarded handsomely.  Chests in
NPPMoria are themed, ranging from large amounts of gold to all kinds of
weapons and armor, and some of the most powerful items in the game.

Scroll of Word of Recall:
     The Scroll of Word of Recall deserves special mention.  Read in the
dungeon, it brings you back to the town.  Read in the town, it takes you back to
your previous recall depth.  This spell takes a little time to take effect, so
don't expect it to save you in a crisis.  Should you mistakenly read a Scroll of
Word of Recall, you may cancel it by reading another.
     If you read this scroll above your current recall depth, you get a special
message asking you if you want to reset it.  If you say yes, the level you are
on becomes the new recall depth.

Ego-Weapons and Armours:
     Some rare weapons and armours have special abilities.  These are called ego
items, and are feared by great and meek.


--- Object enhancement ---

     Weapons and armour may have bonuses to hit chance, damage, and armour
class; it can be very useful indeed to increase these values by reading scrolls
of Enchant Weapon and Enchant Armour.
     - The higher the plusses are, the harder it is to raise them further.  It
       is especially difficult to raise them above 9 or 10.
     - The larger the pile of objects you try to enchant, the more likely it is
       that you will fail.  However, ammunition is unusually easy to enchant.
     - You can sometimes break curses on objects by enchanting them.


--- Object destruction ---

     Objects may be damaged or destroyed on the floor, in your backpack, and
(sometimes) even damaged while you are wearing them.

     - Acid destroys armour, weapons, missile launchers, ammunition, scrolls,
       staffs, and chests.  It may damage equipped armour that does not ignore
       acid.
     - Electricity destroys rings, amulets, rods, and wands.
     - Fire destroys torches, arrows, missile launchers, hafted weapons and
       polearms, gloves, boots, cloaks, shields, soft body armour, spellbooks,
       scrolls, staffs, and chests.
     - Frost destroys potions and empty bottles.
     - Equipped items with plusses can be disenchanted.
     - Wands and staffs can be destroyed by failed recharges.


--- Cursed Objects ---

     Many cursed items exist in the Mines -- either left behind as the result of
failed attempts to create magic items, or deliberately placed by gleeful evil
sorcerers who enjoy a good joke when it gets you killed.
     These horrible objects look perfectly innocent, but will detract from your
character's stats or abilities if worn.  You cannot remove them without breaking
the curse first.  In fact, some are so badly cursed that even this will not
work, and more potent methods are needed.
     If you wear or wield a cursed item, you will immediately feel deathly cold,
and the item will be marked "cursed".
     Shopkeepers will refuse to buy any item that is known to be cursed.


====== Monsters ======


Monsters are worth experience:
     Defeat a monster, and you will gain experience.  The amount you gain
depends on the base monster value, multiplied by its native depth, divided by
your level.

Your Monster Memory:
     When you see a monster for the first time, all you know are its physical
attributes and whatever information the monster description may provide.  As you
fight and kill monsters, use various attacks on them, probe them with magic, and
get killed by them, you learn more about their strengths and weaknesses.
     You recall this memory in one of three ways:  'l'ooking at/e'x'amining the
monster and then pressing 'r' for recall, or by pressing '/' and typing the
monster's letter, or by pressing '~' and going to the monster knowlesge section.
     Unlike object memory, monster memory can be passed on even after your
character dies.  You may use menu commands or command-line options to open up a
specific file that contains a character with a monster memory.

The Monster Health Bar:
     A good way to keep track of a specific monster is to target it.  When you
do so, its health bar appears on the left side of the main screen, just below
the hitpoint and mana indicators.  Similar health bars are also used when
looking around and when displaying the closest monsters.
The health bar uses several letter and colors to tell you more about the monster.
Confused - "c", Stunned - "s", Sleeping - "z", and "* when
the monster is none of the above.  Otherwise - green when healthy, and yellow,
orange, and red when wounded, and if frightened - violet,.

The Monster Mana Bar:
     A good way to keep track of a specific monster's mana is to target it.  When
you do so, its health bar appears on the left side of the main screen, just below
the hitpoint and mana indicators.  Similar health bars are also used when
looking around and when displaying the closest monsters.

Monster attributes:
     The special attributes of monsters can make all the difference to the
danger they pose to you.  Some of the more interesting are listed and described.

     - Hitpoints : Some monsters die easily, others can withstand almost
       anything.
     - Armour : Some monsters are easy to hit with melee blows or missiles,
       others evade or block them quite often.
     - Awareness : Some monsters will stay asleep even if you dance in front of
       them, others are ever vigilant.  The distance that monsters can
       perceive you (if you are not in line of sight) also varies greatly.
     - Color : The color of a monster can be a valuable hint.
     - Chromatic : Changes colors randomly.
     - Invisible : Cannot be seen with normal sight.
     - Warm-blooded : Some monsters can be seen with infravision, others can't.
     - Telepathy : Some monsters are always visible with telepathy, others are
       rarely visible, and others still never visible.
     - Uses symbol : Appears exactly like whatever terrain it is on.
     - Multiply : Monster breeds explosively.
     - Drops : Monsters may drop anything from nothing at all to many excellent
       objects.
     - Experience : The experience you get from killing monsters varies greatly.
     - Evasive: They can frequently dodge an attack at them.
     - Bash Door : Most monsters (but not all) can either bash down or open
       doors.  Everyone can close doors, and some characters can spike doors to
       delay their foes.
     - Pass Wall : Ghosts and some other creatures can float right through
       ordinary walls.
     - Hurt by ... : Monsters may be especially susceptible to light or rock
       remover.
     - Resistant to ... : Monsters can be especially resistant to any or all of
       the elements or poison, or any of the esoteric magics.
     - Cannot be ... : Monsters may be immune to fear, slowing, stunning,
       sleeping, or confusion.
     - Regenerate : Recovers battle damage unusually quickly.
     - Spells : Monsters may fire physical missiles, breathe, cast spells to
       hurt and hinder you, blink and teleport you and themselves, heal them-
       selves, haste themselves or other monsters, summon more opponents,
       and many other things!
     - Casting speed : Be careful of monsters that cast spells very often,
       especially if they also move quickly.
     - Mana - monsters have mana limitations.  When they are out, they can't
       cast most spells.  Note that the dangerous breath attacks do not use
       any mana.
     - Spell power - affects how much damage a monster spell does
     - Smart : Monsters may be skilled at choosing spells, somewhat skilled, or
       unskilled
     - Blows : Monsters can do great damage and inflict nasty effects in melee.
 


