
====== The Town ======

     You begin your adventures in the town.  It consists of six buildings,
each with a shop entranceway, and is well populated.  The first time you are in
town it will be daytime, but the sun rises and sets as time passes.

Townspeople:
     Most townsfolk are fairly harmless.  However, there are slippery-fingered
thieves and armed killers that you need to avoid.  Fights will break out,
though, so be prepared.  Since your character grew up in this world of intrigue,
no experience is awarded for killing the town inhabitants, though you may
acquire treasure.


--- Stores ---

     You enter buildings by walking onto their entranceways, which (in text
mode) are represented by numbers from 1 to 6.
     A new display then replaces the old.  You see the name and race of the
store owner, the name of the store, and the maximum number of gold pieces that
the store owner will pay for any one item.  Below it is displayed the inventory;
if it is numerous, you may display another page by typing space.  Near the
bottom of the screen is displayed a list of commonly-used commands.
     - ESC:  leave the store.
     - 'g' or 'p': get/purchase an item.
     - 'd' or 's': drop/sell an item.
     - 'l': look at an item (display any special properties, read spellbooks)
     - 'v': Toggle between store inventory and services

The General Store ("1"):
     Sells foods, drinks, cloaks, torches, lamps, oil, shovels, picks, spikes,
and ammunition for missile launchers.  Buys items of these types and some
others.

The Armoury ("2"):
     Buys and sells every kind of armour.
    

The Weaponsmith's Shop ("3"):
     Buys and sells melee weapons, missile launchers, and ammunition.

The Temple ("4"):
     Buys and sells blunt weapons, healing and restoration supplies, and various 
other holy items.

 
The Alchemy Shop ("5"):
     Buys and sells potions and scrolls.
 

The Magic Shop ("6"):
     Buys and sells rings, amulets, wands, and staffs.  Also
     buys potions and scrolls.
 
--- Buying and Selling ---

The Price of Items:
     The price of items that change hands depends on their base cost and 
your Charisma. 


Store Stocks:
     Stores never have everything in stock; as time passes, their inventory
slowly changes (but only when you are in the dungeon).  The store owner fully
identifies everything you sell him, and recharges wands and staves. 

Shopkeepers can retire and be replaced:
     Shopkeepers do retire, but only rarely.  He puts everything in the 
store on sale.



