=== Zangband Magic System ===

In the official releases of Angband there are only two types magic
spells: Magic spells and priestly prayers. If the character is a mage,
ranger or a rogue (s)he can learn magic spells; if (s)he is a priest or
a paladin, (s)he can learn prayers. All mages can learn the same spells
and all priests can learn the same spells.

Z+Angband and its predecessor Zangband use a more complex "realms of
magic" system inspired by the commercial fantasy strategy game Master
of Magic (Microprose), which in turn has supposedly borrowed it from
the card game Magic the Gathering (by Wizards of the Coast). The magic
system, as implemented in Z+Angband, consists of eight realms: Life,
Arcane, Sorcery, Nature, Conjuration, Chaos, Death, and Illusion.

While any given realm of magic typically includes spells of a certain
type or theme, each realm should have enough high-level spells to
remain effective throughout the later stages of the game. The main
difference lies in how they support your playing strategy. For example,
some offer attacking spells which let you directly hurt your enemy,
while others offer spells for protection, healing and gathering
information.

In Z+Angband, spellcasting classes can select either one or two realms
from those available. Not all realms are available to all classes.

Unlike in Zangband and Angband and many other similar games, most
characters are not capable of learning every spell in their chosen
realm or realms.  Instead, players will need to make choices about
which spells are best for them.  The choice to learn a spell is
permanent.  

Z+Angband 0.3.0 introduces "spell focus", a mechanic which allows
characters to specialize in individual spells, "learning them"
multiple times in exchange for power bonuses and reduced mana costs
and failure rates.  

***** <ClassSpellAbil>
=== Class Spell Ability ===

Warriors
     Warriors cast no spells. They hate magic. In fact, they even gain
     experience for destroying high level spellbooks.

Mages
     Mages have the least restrictions in choosing and learning spells.
     They can freely choose any two realms when a character is created:
     in the current version, all eight realms are available to them.
     A mage tends to learn and cast all the spells in his / her realms 
     better than any other character. The ability to freely select both 
     realms of magic (which no other character class can do) allows the 
     best support for experimenting and combining different realms, and, 
     thus, for different playing strategies as well.

Priests
     There are two types of priests in Zangband: the 'ordinary' priests
     who, select Life magic as their primary realm, and the 'dark'
     priests, who select Death magic instead of Life magic. No priest
     can have both realms (unless (s)he was created in Zangband 2.0.0
     or 2.0.1). Priests can also select a secondary realm from the
     other six realms, excluding Illusion, and should be able to learn 
     all spells in it as well, even if not as efficiently as mages. 
     As the natural inclination of priests is towards life and healing,
     priests who select Life magic will be able to learn their prayers
     faster and better than their evil colleagues with Death magic, and
     also faster and better than mages.

Rogues
     There are several subtypes of Rogues in Zangband: the exact 'type'
     is determined by the realm of magic chosen by the Rogue. The
     common Thief, agent of the underworld, will probably be content
     with Arcane magic and its wide applicability. The Burglar, on the
     other hand, is more interested in the Sorcery spells, which allow
     him or her to do the job fast and efficiently. The Assassins'
     partiality for Death magic is well known, and they are feared for
     it. There is the Gambler, who will opt for Conjuration magic.  
     And finally, the Trickster relies on Illusions.  All Rogues
     have certain limitations on which spells they can learn, and they
     are not too fast to learn new spells.  Rogues are not adept at
     damage spells, and suffer a power penalty on them.

Rangers
     All rangers are trained in Nature magic, and all Nature spells are
     available to them. They even learn these spells almost as fast as
     mages. They can also select a secondary realm (any other than Life), 
     but they are slow learners in them, and may find themselves unable 
     to learn some of the highest level spells.

Paladins
     Like priests, paladins cannot select which prayers to learn but are
     rewarded with new prayers by their deities. They can learn all
     Life spells, but not as fast as priests. Death Knights study Death
     magic instead of Life magic, but in other respects they are
     similar to normal paladins. Death Knights can learn all Death
     spells. The endless enmity between these two subtypes is most
     evident in their attitudes to each others' realms of magic: an 
     'ordinary' paladin detests Death magic so strongly that he
     or she will even gain experience for destroying their high-level
     spellbooks. A Death Knight, on the other hand, will be very offended 
     by the sight of a Life spellbook, and gains experience for destroying
     high-level ones.


Warrior-Mages
     Warrior-mages begin the game with Arcane magic, and they can
     freely select another realm of magic. Although they do not gain
     new spells as fast as regular mages, they will eventually learn
     every spell in both realms, thus making a very competitive choice
     for players who appreciate Arcane magic.

Chaos Warriors
     Chaos Warriors are, as one might expect, trained in Chaos magic.
     They are not interested in any other form of magic. They can learn
     every Chaos spell.

Monks
     The different sects of monks are devoted to different areas of
     magic. The typical monk is interested in the harmony of the
     nature, and studies Nature magic. An idealist monk would select
     Life magic, and try work to benefit his neighbor. But there also
     are dark monks, who specialize in Death magic. A monk can thus
     select any one of these three Realms. They will eventually learn
     almost all prayers in the discipline of their choice.

Mindcrafter
     Although the powers of a Mindcrafter may seem like magic, this is
     not -- strictly speaking -- the case. They are mental powers,
     independent of the ordinary sources of magic. Consequently,
     Mindcrafters are not interested in 'magic' and learn no spells.  
     Nonetheless, Mindcrafter powers are a type of magic, just not 
     of the eight realms, so their powers are disrupted by anti-magic.

High Mage
     High mages are mages who specialize in one particular field of
     magic and learn it very well -- much better than the ordinary
     mage. For the price of giving up a second realm of magic, they
     gain substantial benefits in the mana costs, minimum levels, and
     failure rates in the spells of the realm of their specialty.  In
     addition, High Mages get enough spell slots to learn every spell
     in their one chosen realm.
  

***** <MagicRealms>
=== The Realms of Magic ===

Life
     Life is magic is 'good' magic; it relies mostly on healing and
     protective spells. It does have a few attack spells as well, but
     these are mostly used for harming and banishing foul minions of
     evil. It is rumored that there is a secret high level prayer which
     will make the priest (or paladin) completely impervious to all
     forms of hostile action.  Life magic is the best realm for spells
     to enhance or improve the caster.

Sorcery
     Sorcery is a `meta` realm, including enchantment and general
     spells. It provides superb protection spells (such as Teleport
     spells for fleeing and even Globe of Invulnerability), spells to
     enhance your odds in combat (Slow Monster, Haste Self, Confuse
     Monster) and, most importantly, a vast selection of spells for
     gathering information: in addition to the usual detection and
     identify spells, one of the standard spellbooks has a spell called
     Identify True, which gives you full knowledge of a given object!
     In the rare books, there are spells with which you can enchant
     your items or turn unwanted items to gold. However, Sorcery has
     one weakness: it has no spells to deal direct damage to your
     enemies.

Arcane 
     Even more than Sorcery, Arcane magic is a general purpose realm
     of magic. It attempts to encompass all 'useful' spells from all
     realms, and almost succeeds, with the probable exception of
     *Identify*. This is the downside of Arcane magic: while Arcane
     does have all the necessary 'tool' spells for a dungeon delver,
     it has no ultra-powerful high level spells. As a consequence, all
     Arcane spellbooks can be bought in town, and regardless of your
     class, you will eventually be able to cast every Arcane spell.
     Furthermore, the Arcane realm can be mastered much earlier than
     other realms because of its lack of high-power spells. It should
     also be noted that the 'specialized' realms (i.e. other than
     Arcane) usually offer the same spell at a lower level and
     cost. Arcane magic is therefore perhaps not recommendable as
     one's only realm of magic, but it should be a very nice addition
     to fill up the gaps in the selection of tools spells in another
     realm.

Conjuration
     Conjuration magic is concerned with the creation and movement of
     things via magical means.  It has a wide variety of summoning
     spells that can be effective in all stages of the game.  In
     addition, it has an excellent variety of transportation spells.
     It has some direct offensive spells in which a dangerous projectile
     is created.  It also has some healing, as restorative herbs and
     essences can be created by magic.  However, Conjuration magic has
     a near-complete lack of spells for gathering information, so if 
     you want to be able to identify items or detect monsters around
     corners you will have to look elsewhere.  (Conjuration magic is
     similar in some ways to the discontinued Trump school of magic.)

Nature
     Early levels may be rather difficult for a spellcaster relying on
     Nature magic, as the early spells offer only limited protection,
     detection and curing capabilities. However, at higher levels there
     are very useful offensive spells available, especially should the
     spellcaster be lucky enough to find an extremely rare spellbook
     called "Nature's Wrath". Nature also has a spell of Herbal
     Healing, which is the only high-power healing spell outside the
     realm of Life magic.  Nature magic is enhanced when the caster is
     in the wilderness; all Nature spells get a 25% power bonus
     while the caster is outside.

Chaos
     There are few types of magic more unpredictable and difficult to
     control than Chaos magic. Chaos is the very element of unmaking,
     and the Chaos spells are the most terrible weapons of destruction
     imaginable. From Magic Missile and Fire Bolt to the medium level
     Fire Ball and Disintegrate, and finally to the awesome spells of
     Breathe Logrus, Mana Storm and Call the Void, Chaos offers an
     unsurpassable arsenal of attack spells. The caster can also call
     on the primal forces of Chaos to induce mutations in his/her
     opponents and even him/herself, but otherwise, Chaos has no
     protective spells. Beware, though, Chaos spells are known to
     backfire easily and product undesired effects. This is especially
     true in the version 2.1.0 of Zangband and later, where the forces
     of Chaos can easily twist the hapless individual foolish enough to
     invoke them, turning them horrendous spawns of Chaos.  Chaos magic
     is mainly concerned with spells to deal direct damage to enemies,
     and has relatively few utility spells.

Death
     There is no fouler nor more evil category of spells than the
     necromantic spells of Death Magic. These spells are relatively
     hard to learn, but at higher levels the spells give the caster
     power over living and the (un)dead. Poison, vampirism, death
     spells and even hellfire can be directed by the caster, but the
     most powerful spells need his / her own blood as the focus, often
     hurting the caster in the process of casting. Should a Death
     wizard find the legendary tome Necronomicon, he can expect to gain
     very great powers indeed, but at a cost: few that have studied the
     accursed tome have retained their sanity.  It is rumored that the
     secret of Liches lies in the Necronomicon, and that those who dare
     may become a Lich themselves.

Illusion
     This realm of magic is subtle and strange.  Its spells primarily
     deal with the creation or detection of illusions, semi-reality that
     can be fully real to those who believe in it.  Illusion magic has
     fairly limited offensive capabilities, but can create (real) light
     and darkness attacks.  Other attack spells are mainly illusionary
     attacks, which may sometimes be disbelieved by intelligent enemies.
     Some illusion spells focus on affecting the mind of the victims,
     such as Phantasmal Horror which causes mass fear and confusion.  
     It is rumored that powerful Illusionists are able to create the
     illusion of magic itself, and be able to access spells from other
     realms through great effort.  Illusion magic has some limited 
     information capabilities and no direct escape spells, but has a 
     wide variety of trick spells that can aid an escape.  


***** <SpellSlots>
=== On Learning Spells ... ===

All realms of magic have 38 spells, except for Arcane which has 40.
However, only High Magi are capable of learning all the spells in the
realm they choose: others get a smaller total number of spells than
there are available in their realm combination choice.  Specifically,
the total number of spells you can learn is determined by your class.

Class		       Total spell slots
----------------------------------------
Mage	                     68 (2 realms)
Priest                       64 (2 realms)
Rogue                        30
Ranger                       60 (2 realms)
Paladin                      32
Warrior-Mage                 64 (2 realms)
Chaos Warrior                30
Monk                         34
High Mage                    40

Furthermore, not all spell slots are created equal.  Your slots come
in 5 tiers: one for the first 10 levels of spells you can learn, one
for the next 10, and so on.  You can use a spell slot at one tier to
learn a lower-level spell, but not vice-versa.  For instance, a Chaos
Warrior gets 7 tier-1 slots, 6 tier-2, tier-3, and tier-4 slots, and 
5 tier-5 slots.  Thus, a Chaos Warrior, whose first spells are at level
2, can learn at most 5 spells of levels 42-50, at most 5+6 spells of
levels 32-50, and so on.

Slots of a given tier are not accessible to you until your level
advances beyond the top level of the previous tier.

When studying a spell, you will automatically use the lowest possible
tier slot to study it.  When you are close to running out of slots on
a tier, or when you are about to "downgrade" a slot, the game will 
check with you to confirm the action.  (You can disable the "study_warn"
option if you don't need the warning.)

The spell knowledge menu (in the knowledges menu, '~' to access) will
give you information about which spell slots you have used and what
you have left, and what spells you know.

--- Overlapping Spells ---

When you use more than one realm of magic, there will often be
overlaps between your realms.  In some cases, different realms share
spells that are exactly the same -- Light is a good example, as all
realms except for Death have it.  The game is intelligent about
overlapping spells: if you learn a spell in one realm, and it exists
in the other, you will effectively learn both spells at once, for only
one spell slot.  Furthermore, such overlap spells get a 10% bonus to
spell power: when you study two realms that are both good at a
particular magical spell, your expertise in both makes you better at
casting that spell.

If you learn a spell in one realm and it is too high a level for you
to use in the other realm, the spell will be marked as "forgotten"
in the other realm.

--- Spell Focus ---

Those who cast actual spells (as opposed to prayers) can focus on
individual spells by learning the multiple times.  Each level of spell
focus gives you higher and higher bonuses to the spell's power, its
mana cost, and the rate of failure for the spell.  You can focus a
spell up to three times, that is, you can "learn" a spell up to four
times total.

Focus level		Power	Mana	Fail    Min. Fail
---------------------------------------------------------
Learned			0%	0%	0%	0%
Improved		+10%	-20%	-5%	-1%
Specialized		+40%	-33%	-10%	-1%
Mastered		+50%	-40%	-15%	-2%

Spell focus occurs at higher levels than the original spell.  For
instance, if a Mage wishes to Improve the level 1 Magic Missile spell,
this will be a level 8 spell.  So it can't be improved until the
character is 8th level, but it will still be a tier-1 spell.  To
Specialize Magic Missile would be a level 15 spell: a tier-2 spell.
The difference for spell focus depends on your class: Mages and High
Mages can improve a spell every 7 levels, Warrior-Mages can improve a
spell every 8 levels, and Rogues, Rangers, and Chaos Warriors can
improve a spell every 10 levels.  Priests, Paladins, and Monks, since 
they get their prayers randomly, can never improve spells.

Mana cost and Failure adjustments are self-explanatory.  Power
adjustments affect each spell differently, but there are common
themes.  Power adjustments generally affect anything quantitative
about the spell: damage, amount healed, duration, difficulty for
monsters to save, the quality of monsters summoned with summoning
spells, et cetera.  Status bonuses (e.g. the bonuses you get while you
are "blessed" or under "heroism") do not change.  Power also has an
interesting effect on enchantment spells.  With a large power bonus,
you are more likely to succeed in enchanting heavily enchanted items.

***** <CastingSpells>
=== On Casting Spells ... ===

Players who select spellcasting characters may notice a few unusual
phenomena during the course of the game. Here's a few helps and
hints on what may be happening.

--- Armor and Spell Casting ---

All spellcasting classes are penalized for wielding armor above a
certain total combined weight. The threshold varies between 30lbs
for a mage and 40lbs for a paladin. Typically, the more reliant on
spells/prayers your class is deemed to be, the lower your weight
allowance. If you exceed your weight limit, your mana will drop.
This penalty is fairly stiff for low level characters but can
generally be ignored by high level ones.

--- Mage-Types and Gloves ---

Spellcasters who use INT as the stat determining their spellcasting
ability will be penalized heavily for wielding armor on their
hands. The exception to this is that wielding gloves, gauntlets or
cesti which boost DEX or which grant Free Action will result in no
penalty. The rationale behind this is that the hands are needed to
perform intricate gestures that accompany the casting of the spell
and anything encumbering the hands would interfere with this. The
priest-type classes (priest, paladin and monk) do not have the same
restrictions as they are viewed as invoking the power of their
deity directly through prayer.

--- Casting Spells With Insufficient Mana ---

Occasionally, you may try (either by accident or in desperation) to
cast a spell when you have insufficient mana to do so. In these
circumstances you will be told by the game that you do not have
enough mana to cast the spell and then asked if you want to anyway.
Casting the spell under these conditions has a drastically reduced
chance of success and may also result in your constitution being
damaged. It may also cause you to faint from the effort which will
effectively paralyze you for several turns (even with free action).
The CON drain and the paralyzation may happen regardless of whether
the casting was successful or not.

High Mages are more likely to succeed at casting spells without
sufficient mana.  However, they are equally prone to the damaging side
effects of doing so.

--- Spell Durations ---

Some spells such as Haste-Self or Resistance grant an effect which
wears off after a certain period of time. With very few exceptions,
multiple castings of such spells are not cumulative in terms of the
duration of the spell. In other words, casting a spell which has a
duration of 20 turns three times will not result in a duration of
60 turns. Typically, the subsequent castings will add only a small
amount to the total duration.


***** <SpellTypes>
=== Spell Types ===

--- Bolts and Beams ---

A bolt spell is aimed in a direction or at a target but will hit
the first monster or obstruction in its targeted direction. This
may or may not be the intended target. Occasionally, you may note
that your bolt spell hits multiple targets along the line of fire.
This is because some bolt spells are granted a chance of 'beaming'
which may be either fixed or level-dependent. A beam will hit every
target within range along a 'straight' line in the direction in
which it was aimed.

--- Balls ---

There are two things to remember about ball spells. Firstly, unlike
bolt spells, they can be aimed at a specific target which allows
you to target a specific monster as opposed to the first one in the
direction you are aiming. Secondly, they have a radius (which
varies from spell to spell). A radius value of one or more will
result in the spell affecting monsters (and possibly objects, etc)
around the target in addition to the target itself.

--- Line-of-Sight ---

Line-of-sight spells affect all monsters that that are currently
in sight of your character. This includes monsters that may not
currently be visible due to darkness but would be if it was light.

--- Area ---

Area spells affect an area around the player. The size of the area
can vary considerably. For example, Light Area lights a single room
while Detect Traps affects a map panel and Genocide the entire
level.

***** <Hints>
=== Hints and Tips ===

If you miss the `old` magic user, try picking Sorcery and Chaos magic
to get the most commonly used mage spells early on (Magic Missile,
Detect Monsters + Traps + etc, Identify).

It is generally a good idea to pick one defensive realm and one 
offensive realm. For example try using life or sorcery with chaos or
death magic. Nature is somewhat neutral: it has both offensive and
defensive spells, but is not very generous with either, not at least
early in the game. Nature should work best with characters who can use
other means to survive until they get the more powerful high level
spells. 

If you pick the realms always in the same order (e.g. nature as your
first realm and chaos as your second realm, not the other way around)
you will be less confused when trying to pick the correct spellbook to
use in the game. If you still get confused trying to select the correct
spellbook, try using macros (either the 'full' macros or inscriptions).


***** <SpellLists>
=== Spell Lists ===


LIFE: Standard Spellbooks

Book of Common Prayer
     1.  Detect Evil
     2.  Cure Light Wounds
     3.  Bless
     4.  Neutralize Poison
     5.  Call Light
     6.  Detect Traps and Doors
     7.  Cure Medium Wounds
     8.  Heroism
     9.  Satisfy Hunger
     10. Remove Curse
     11. Turn Undead

High Mass
     1.  Holy Prayer
     2.  Strength
     3.  Cure Serious Wounds
     4.  Sense Unseen
     5.  Holy Orb
     6.  Preservation
     7.  Protection from Evil
     8.  Healing
     9.  Glyph of Warding
     10. Word of Recall

LIFE: Rare Spellbooks

Sacred Rites
     This book has powerful prayers to ward off, banish and destroy the
     forces of evil.

Codex of Heaven
     This book has the most powerful prayers of protection and healing,
     as well as prayers of holy visions.


SORCERY: Standard Spellbooks

Beginner's Handbook
     1.  Detect Monsters
     2.  Phase Door
     3.  Detect Doors and Traps
     4.  Light Area
     5.  Detect Objects and Treasure
     6.  Confuse Monster
     7.  Teleport
     8.  Sleep Monster
     9.  Slow Monster
     10. Magic Mapping
     11. Silence Monster

Master Sorcerer's Handbook
     1.  Charm Monster
     2.  Mass Sleep
     3.  Identify
     4.  Teleport Away
     5.  Haste Self
     6.  Magic Shield
     7.  Detection True
     8.  Identify True
     9.  Gather Mana
     10. Mass Identify

SORCERY: Rare Spellbooks

Pattern Sorcery
     More powerful spells of detection, information and transportation.

Grimoire of Power
     More powerful enchantments against monsters, spells to enchant
     items, and the Globe of Invulnerability.


NATURE: Standard Spellbooks

Call of the Wild
     1.  Detect Creatures
     2.  First Aid
     3.  Detect Doors and Traps
     4.  Foraging
     5.  Daylight
     6.  Animal Taming
     7.  Resist Environment
     8.  Cure Wounds & Poison
     9.  Stone to Mud
     10. Lightning Bolt
     11. Frost Bolt

Nature Mastery
     1.  Wall of Wood
     2.  Ray of Sunlight
     3.  Fire Bolt
     4.  Stone Skin
     5.  Entangle
     6.  Earthquake
     7.  Wall of Stone
     8.  Summon Animals
     9.  Protect from Corrosion
     10. Herbal Healing

NATURE: Rare Spellbooks

Nature's Gifts
     Nature's Gifts for protection against the forces of nature and
     hostiles.

Nature's Wrath
     Nature's destructive force harnessed for your use against your
     enemies.


CHAOS: Standard Spellbooks

Sign of Chaos
     1.  Ray of Frost
     2.  Magic Missile
     3.  Trap / Door Destruction
     4.  Flash of Light
     5.  Blink
     6.  Static Field
     7.  Touch of Confusion
     8.  Mana Burst
     9.  Immolation
     10. Polymorph Other
     11. Fire Bolt

Chaos Mastery
     1.  Fist of Force
     2.  Teleport Self
     3.  Chain Lightning
     4.  Dispel Traps
     5.  Wonder
     6.  Field of Chaos
     7.  Sonic Boom
     8.  Beam of Energy
     9.  Fire Ball
     10. Teleport Other
     11. Word of Destruction

CHAOS: Rare Spellbooks

Chaos Channels
     Unusual spells that allow you to call on the forces of chaos to
     induce changes in your possessions, in your enemies and in
     yourself.

Armageddon Tome
     The rarest of all spellbooks, filled with the most devastating
     spells.


DEATH: Standard Spellbooks

Black Prayers
     1.  Detect Evil & Unlife
     2.  Malediction
     3.  Horrify
     4.  Stinking Cloud
     5.  Black Sleep
     6.  Resist Poison
     7.  Detect Aura
     8.  Enslave Undead
     9.  Nether Bolt
     10. Orb of Entropy
     11. Invisibility

Black Mass
     1.  Shadow Gate
     2.  Banshee's Wail
     3.  Freezing Aura
     4.  Summon Lesser Undead
     5.  Vampiric Drain
     6.  Cloak of Fear
     7.  Identify
     8.  Dispel Life
     9.  Genocide
     10.  Restore Life

DEATH: Rare Spellbooks

Black Channels
     Spells that turn you into a bloodthirsty killing machine, and
     which enable you to call upon the nether forces of darkness to
     wreak havoc upon your foes.

Necronomicon
     The legendary tome of unholy visions, death and destruction.


CONJURATION: Standard Spellbooks

Tricks for Beginners
     1.  Phase Door
     2.  Fuel
     3.  Magic Missile
     4.  Summon Animal
     5.  Light
     6.  Heal Wounds
     7.  Teleport Self
     8.  Summon Phantom
     9.  Stinking Cloud
     10. Acid Arrow
     11. Plague of Insects

Master Conjurer's Handbook
     1.  Glitterdust
     2.  Conjure Food
     3.  Summon Animals
     4.  Dimension Door
     5.  Teleport Away
     6.  Flame Arrow
     7.  Haste
     8.  Summon Elemental
     9.  Teleport Level
     10. Word of Recall

CONJURATION: Rare Spellbooks

Energy Conjuring
     This book contains spells capable of summoning and manipulating 
     energy itself.

Manual of the Planes
     This most powerful tome concerns travel and summoning across the
     planes.

ILLUSION: Standard Spellbooks

Sleight of Hand
     1.  Light
     2.  Phantom Arrow
     3.  Noble Visage
     4.  Invisibility
     5.  Detect Traps
     6.  Dancing Lights
     7.  Detect Magic
     8.  See Invisible
     9.  Confuse Monster
     10. Mirror Image
     11. Ray of Light

Smoke and Mirrors
     1.  Hypnotic Pattern
     2.  Charm Monster
     3.  Phantasmal Horror
     4.  Horrid Visage
     5.  Magic Mapping
     6.  Globe of Darkness
     7.  Sense Minds
     8.  Scream
     9.  Phantom Fire
     10. Glimpse of Death

ILLUSION: Rare Spellbooks

Illusion and Deception
     This book includes advanced spells capable of creating intelligent
     illusions and weak illusions of magic.

Tome of Shadows
     This most powerful book of illusions includes the most powerful
     tricks and secrets.

ARCANE: All Spellbooks

Cantrips for Beginners
     1.  Zap
     2.  Detect Monsters
     3.  Blink
     4.  Light Area
     5.  Fuel
     6.  Detect Traps
     7.  Detect Invisibility
     8.  Cure Poison and Fear
     9.  Cure Medium Wounds
     10. Resist Cold and Fire

Minor Arcana
     1.  Lore
     2.  Dispel Traps
     3.  See Invisible
     4.  Resist Blindness
     5.  Resist Confusion
     6.  Stone to Mud
     7.  Ray of Light
     8.  Satisfy Hunger
     9.  Teleport
     10. Resist Elements

Major Arcana
     1.  Identify Type
     2.  Resist Poison
     3.  Sleep Monster
     4.  Magic Mapping
     5.  Elemental Bolt
     6.  Detection
     7.  Heroism
     8.  Teleport Away
     9.  Identify
     10. Cure Mortal Wounds

Manual of Mastery
     1.  Teleport Level
     2.  Elemental Ball
     3.  Resistance
     4.  Enchant Armor
     5.  Probe Resistance
     6.  Recharging
     7.  Word of Recall
     8.  ESP
     9.  Enchant Weapon
     10. Clairvoyance


--
Original   : (??)
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Mangojuice
Last update: November 4, 2008
