
=== Introduction to the GSNband (since 0.5) Magic System ===

(Since 1.2 - includes mindcraft explanation, see end of file)

In the official releases of Angband there are only two types magic
spells:  Magic spells and priestly prayers.  If the character is a
mage, ranger or a rogue  (s)he can learn magic spells; if (s)he is
a priest  or  a paladin,  (s)he  can learn prayers.  All mages can
learn the same spells and all priests can learn the same prayers.

GSNband  has  switched to using  a more complex  "realms of magic"
system.  Priestly magic is retained as the realm of Life. There is
also an opposite realm of Death, or necromantic magic. The bulk of
magic  spells  is represented by four elemental realms (fire, air,
earth,  water).  The  first three took over old Chaos, Sorcery and
Nature  magics  from  ZAngband.  Water  is  a completely new magic
realm.

Last  but  not  least,  Arcane  magic  is  viewed as "a little  of
everything"  realm.  Arcane  users have access to the power of all
elements,   but   they  are   nowhere  as  powerful  as  the  more
specialized magicians.

In standard Angband,  the type of a character's spell ability was
determined  solely by  the  character  class.  In  GSNband,   all
classes can select one  (or even two)  types  from  the realms of
magic available. (See  later  for available realms / class.)

In standard Angband, there were 9 spellbooks for all spellcasters.
In  GSNband,  there are four spellbooks per realm. Two of them can
be bought in a store (Life spellbooks in the town temple, the rest
in  the  magic  shop;  of  course the Black market may stock _any_
spellbook).  The  new  Arcane  realm is an exception to this rule:
Arcane  magic  has no high level spellbooks; all Arcane spellbooks
can  be bought in the magic shop. Just as one might expect, Arcane
magic lacks the really powerful high level spells.

A  character  with  two  realms of magic will thus need to carry a
maximum  of  8 spellbooks while a character with only one realm of
magic (paladins and rogues) will only need to carry a maximum of 4
spellbooks.  All realms have 32 spells, and each book has 8 spells
(the two last spells of Water are not yet implemented - GSN)



=== Character Classes and Spell Ability  ===

WARRIORS:  Warriors cast no spells. They hate magic. In fact, they
even gain experience for destroying high level spellbooks.

MAGES: Mages have the least restrictions  in choosing and learning
spells. They can freely choose any  two realms when a character is
created: in the current version, all seven realms are available to
them,  although their natural inclination makes Life magic  fairly
hard for them.  Otherwise, a mage tends to learn and cast all  the
spells  in his / her realms better than any  other  character. The
ability   select  both realms  of  magic (which no other character
class can do)  allows  the  best  support  for  experimenting  and
combining  different  realms,  and, thus,  for  different  playing
strategies as well.

PRIESTS:   There  are  two  types  of  priests  in  Zangband:  the
'ordinary'  priests  who,  select  Life  magic  as  their  primary
realm,  and  the 'dark' priests, who select Death magic instead of
Life  magic.  No  priest  can  have  both realms (unless (s)he was
created  in  Zangband  2.0.0  or 2.0.1). Priests can also select a
secondary  realm from the other five realms, and should be able to
learn  all  spells  in  it  as well, even if not as efficiently as
mages.  However,  when learning spells, priests cannot voluntarily
decide  which  spells to study: they are rewarded with new prayers
by   their   patron   deities,  with  no  money-back  satisfaction
guarantee.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  since  the  natural
inclination  of a priest is towards Life magic, priests who select
Life  magic  will be able to learn their prayers faster and better
than their evil colleagues with Death magic.

ROGUES:  There  are  several  subtypes  of Rogues in Zangband: the
exact  'type'  is  determined  by the realm of magic chosen by the
Rogue. The common Thief, agent of the underworld, will probably be
content with Arcane magic and its wide applicability. The Burglar,
on  the  other  hand,  is more interested in the Air spells, which
allow  him  or  her  to  do  the  job  fast  and  efficiently. The
Assassins'  partiality for Death magic is well known, and they are
feared for it.

RANGERS:  All  rangers  are  trained in Earth magic, and all Earth
spells  are available to them. They even learn these spells almost
as  fast  as  mages.  They can also select a secondary realm (from
Arcane, Air, Fire, Water and Death), but they are slow learners in
them,  and may find themselves unable to learn some of the highest
level spells.

PALADINS:  Paladins  are  trained  in  Life magic (only), and they
despise  the  other  realms  of  magic  (which  they regard as the
devil's  work).  Like priests, they cannot select which prayers to
learn but are rewarded with new prayers by their deities. They can
learn  all  Life  spells,  but not as fast as priests. In the most
recent versions, there is a new subtype of the paladins: the Death
Knight. Death Knights study Death magic instead of Life magic, but
in  other  respects  they  are  similar  to normal paladins. Death
Knights  can  learn  all  Death spells. The endless enmity between
these  two  subtypes  is  most evident in their attitudes to other
realms  of  magic: an 'ordinary' detests the other realms of magic
(than  Life)  so strongly that he or she will even gain experience
for destroying their high-level spellbooks. A Death Knight, on the
other  hand,  is  very  tolerant  of  the other realms -- to annoy
Paladins,  perhaps,  if  for no other reason. A Death Knight will,
however, be very offended by the sight of Life spellbook, and will
do  anything  to  destroy  it;  and this will even give him or her
experience, if the Life spellbook in question is a high-level one.

WARRIOR-MAGES: Warrior-mages begin the game with Arcane magic, and
they  can  freely  select another realm of magic. Although they do
not gain new spells as fast as regular mages, they will eventually
learn  every  spell in both realms, thus making a very competitive
choice for players who appreciate Arcane magic.

CHAOS WARRIORS: Chaos Warriors are trained in Fire magic, which is
closely  associated  with  Chaos.  They  are not interested in any
other form of magic. They can learn every Fire spell.

MONKS: The different sects of monks are devoted to different areas
of  magic.  The  typical  monk is interested in the harmony of the
nature,  and  studies  Earth magic.  An idealist monk would select
Life  magic, and try work to benefit his neighbour. But there also
are  dark  monks,  who  specialize in Death magic. A monk can thus
select  any  one of these three realms. They will eventually learn
all prayers in the discipline of their choice.

MINDCRAFTER:  Although  the  powers of a Mindcrafter may seem like
magic,  this  is  not  --  strictly speaking -- the case. They are
mental  powers,  independent  of  the  ordinary  sources of magic.
Consequently,  Mindcrafters  are  not  interested  in  'magic' and
learn no spells (but see below for their own domain, mindcraft).

HIGH MAGE: High mages are mages who specialize in one particular
field of magic  and learn it  very well --  much better than the
ordinary mage.  For  the price of giving up a  second  realm  of
magic, they gain substantial benefits in the mana costs, minimum
levels,  and failure rates  in the spells of  the realm of their
specialty.


=== The Realms of Magic ===

General note: all elemental realms have the following common spells,
each tied to their respective element:

  * a low-level minor bolt attack, with some chance of becoming a beam
  * spell giving timed resistance to the element
  * gate spell (a weak radius 2 ball + teleport)
  * a stronger bolt or ball spell(s), or both types
  * conjuring spirits, elementals and greater elementals (this
    doesn't work properly if you have two elemental realms,
    though)

LIFE: Life is magic is 'good' magic; it relies mostly on healing
and protective spells. It does have a few attack spells as well,
but these are mostly used for harming and banishing foul minions
of evil. It is rumoured that there is a secret high level prayer
which  will  make the  priest (or paladin)  highly impervious to
all forms of hostile action.

ARCANE:  Arcane  magic  is  a  general  purpose realm of magic. It
attempts  to  encompass  all  'useful' spells from all realms, and
almost  succeeds,  with the probable exception of *Identify*. This
is  the  downside  of Arcane magic: while Arcane does have all the
necessary   'tool'   spells  for  a  dungeon  delver,  it  has  no
ultra-powerful  high  level  spells.  As a consequence, all Arcane
spellbooks can be bought in town. It should also be noted that the
'specialized'  realms  (i.e.  other than Arcane) usually offer the
same  spell  at  a lower level and cost. Arcane magic is therefore
perhaps  not  recommendable  as  one's only realm of magic, but it
should  be  a  very  nice  addition  to  fill  up  the gaps in the
selection of tools spells in another realm.

AIR:  Air  is the element of speed, rapid movement and discretion.
Air  spells  afford  you convenient and cheap means to escape your
enemies  via teleportation, and at higher levels you can even gain
control  over it.  Air is associated with electricity attacks, and
can  also  help you protect yourself from them. Finally, Air magic
is rumoured to give its high-level casters a protective aura which
greatly decreases their chance of being hit by enemies.

WATER:  Water  is perhaps the most original of all magic realms in
GSNband.  It  is  the  source  of life and growth, so Water spells
give  you  means  to  restore  your  life force by robbing another
living  creature  from  it,  or they can give your weapon a chance
to  become  a  powerful  ego-item if you can find a proper monster
corpse  and  chant  the  spell called Transfer Life over it. Water
is  associated  with  cold  attacks, and can also help you protect
yourself  from them. Finally, Water magic gives you several spells
with which you can influence and command aquatic creatures.

EARTH:  Having  harnessed  the  forces  of  nature, an experienced
Earth magic  user  is  able  to befriend  animals,  magically feed
himself  while journeying, use the healing powers of earth to cure
his  wounds  and  remove poison effects, and detect things around.
Earth  is  associated  with  acid  attacks,  and can also help you
protect yourself from them.

FIRE: Fire is the most destructive element. Those choosing fire as
their  magic realm find themselves possessing an array of powerful
offensive  spells,  even  though  they  are  often  lacking on the
defensive  side. At higher levels, they can also attempt to invoke
the  dreadful  powers of raw chaos, which can wreak havoc over the
whole  dungeon  level,  as well as using those powers to polymorph
themselves  into  another  race.  It  is also possible for them to
summon  fearsome  demons as their servants. Be wary, though, since
failed  fire  or chaos spells will vent their destructive force on
wild magic effects, which are mostly harmful to you.

DEATH:  There  is  no fouler nor more evil category of spells than
the necromantic spells of Death Magic. These spells are relatively
hard  to  learn,  but  at higher levels the spells give the caster
power  over  living  and  the  (un)dead.  Poison, vampirism, death
spells  and  even  hellfire can be directed by the caster, but the
most  powerful spells need his / her own blood as the focus, often
hurting  the  caster  in  the  process  of casting. Should a Death
wizard find the legendary tome Necronomicon, he can expect to gain
very  great  powers  indeed,  but at a cost: few that have studied
the accursed tome have retained their sanity.


=== Notes on Summoned / Charmed Creatures ===

A  friendly  creature can be a mixed blessing. At first sight, one
might  think  that  they  can  make the game much easier. It is of
course  highly  satisfying to send your pet Hell Wyrm into a Troll
pit and wait outside, listening for the howls of agony and terror,
the sounds of guts splattering, bones crunching and so on. But one
should  not  expect  to gain any experience for such a combat: you
will  only  gain  experience for creatures to whom you deliver the
death blow yourself. New experiences require hazards, nobody gains
experience by sitting home watching the TV.

Secondly,  friendly  monsters  are  often so eager to destroy your
opponents  they  may  forget  all  about you, and you get trampled
under their feet as they charge at your foe. They are not as smart
as  the regular monsters, since they have given up their free will
to  serve  you.  So  don't  stand next to that Snaga when your pet
Cyberdemon  brandishes  its  rocket launcher! Pets are also rather
easily irritable. Once you do something which causes the slightest
discomfort to them, they will revert to their normal behaviour and
consider  you  their main target. This is something to think about
before  lighting  up a room if you have pet orcs. Needless to say,
nobody  wants  to  be  your  friend  if  you are aggravating them.
Finally,  it  takes a lot of mental energy to maintain the control
over  the charmed monsters. The first monster or the first few are
'free',  but  after that maintaining the control will start taxing
your  mana  regain  rate. The higher the sum of the levels of your
pets  the  less mana you will be able to regain. Keep this in mind
if  you  have  a  pet  which  can summon or otherwise produce more
pets...


=== Hints and Tips ===

If  you miss the `old` magic user, try picking Air or Arcane magic
to  get  the  most  commonly  used  mage  spells  early  on (Magic
Missile, Detect Monsters + Traps + etc, Identify).

It  is  generally  a good idea to pick one defensive realm and one
offensive  realm.  For  example try using Life or Air with Fire or
Death  magic. Earth is somewhat neutral: it has both offensive and
defensive  spells,  but  is  not very generous with either, not at
least  early  in  the game. Earth should work best with characters
who  can  use  other  means  to  survive  until  they get the more
powerful high level spells.

If you pick the realms always in the same order (e.g. nature
as  your first realm and chaos as your second realm, not the
other way around)  you will be less confused  when trying to
pick the correct spellbook to use in the game.

If you still get confused trying to select the correct spellbook,
try using macros (either the 'full' macros or inscriptions).

=== Mindcraft ===

The art of psionics, also called mindcraft, involves considerable effort
on the part of the practicioner if unaided. Fortunately, the link between 
the stores of mental energy and their outward display shaped by thought
can be facilitated using the so-called foci, or small mysterious necklaces
made of adamantite and therefore invulnerable to elements.

There are five psionic disciplines from which a beginner mindcrafter can
choose from; bonuses from wearing the corresponding focus are given
in parentheses. You start with the focus for the discipline you choose; you
must find the others somewhere or buy them in the library (they appear there
from time to time).

You receive some bonuses (lower failure rates and some increased effects) when
using powers from your starting discipline. In the long run, however, you
will need all five foci to survive in the depths of Angband.

1) Telepathy - the most basic and easiest discipline, it permits contact
with other minds, possibly in order to damage or otherwise confuse them.
(+2 INT, WIS, CHR)

2) Psychoportation - deals with transporting the player or those of his
choice from place to place. The most powerful powers from this discipline
can bar using it to others, resulting in total impossibility to teleport
in the given area (one dungeon level)
(+2 DEX)

3) Psychometabolism - is able to convert internal mind reserves into
swift healing effects, better reactions (AC), and even into an incorporeal
state called Shadowform. Reverse effects can be applied to others, hurting
them in the process.
(+2 STR, CON, sustain CON)

4) Psychokinetics - typically mind-damaging powers, augmented by the 
Inertial Power barrier, which can greatly reduce damage sustained from
monster breaths, but on the other hand can also increase damage from
other types of attacks, so beware!
(resist shards)

5) Clairsentience - It can be used to sense surrounding dungeon features 
with a power similar to echolocation, search for magical auras, or to inquire
into the aura of an object already found.
(+3 to searching, resist blindness)

Note that beings which are mindless are immune to mind attacks and cannot
be contacted with using telepathy. Minds of undead and demons can be detected 
and striven with, but the probability of harmful backlashes is high. There
is also a considerable chance that the monster will notice the intrusion,
if it hasn't already.
