=== Introduction to the Cthangband Magic System ===

In  the normal ('Vanilla') releases of Angband there are only  two
types  magic  spells: Magic spells and priestly  prayers.  If  the
character  is  a  mage, ranger or a rogue (s)he  can  learn  magic
spells;  if  (s)he  is  a  priest or a paladin,  (s)he  can  learn
prayers.  All mages can learn the same spells and all priests  can
learn the same spells.

Cthangband  uses a more complex "realms of magic" system  inspired
by the commercial fantasy strategy game "Master of Magic" (written
by  Microprose), which in turn has supposedly borrowed it from the
card game Magic the Gathering (by Wizards of the Coast). The magic
system,  as  implemented in Cthangband, consists of eight  realms:
Life,  Sorcery, Nature, Chaos, Death, Folk, Planar  and  Corporeal
magic. (See later for details.)

In  standard  Angband, solely the character class  determined  the
type  of  a  character's spell ability. In Cthangband, almost  all
classes  can  select one (or even two) types from  the  realms  of
magic available. (See later for available realms / class.) Since a
character  can  have (at most) two realms of magic,  and  the  old
spells  have been split between the existing realms, on the  first
glance  it  may  seem  that  this system  makes  spell-users  less
powerful. However, the opposite holds true. While a given realm of
magic  typically  includes spells of a certain  type,  new  ultra-
powerful  rare high-level spells have been added to  many  realms.
Any  spell realm should have enough high-level spells even for the
later  stages of the game. The main difference lies  in  how  they
support  your  playing strategy: some offer "weapon" spells  which
let  you  directly hurt your enemy, while others offer spells  for
protection, healing and gathering information.

In standard Angband, there were 9 spellbooks for all spellcasters.
In  Cthangband, there are 4 spellbooks per realm. Two of them  can
be  bought in a store (either in the temple, bookshop or the magic
shop;  of course the Black market may stock *any* spellbook).  The
new  Folk  realm is an exception to this rule: Folk magic  has  no
high  level spellbooks; all Folk spellbooks can be bought  in  the
bookshop.  Just as one might expect, Folk magic lacks  the  really
powerful  high level spells. A character with two realms of  magic
will  thus  need  to  carry  a maximum of  8  spellbooks  while  a
character with only one realm of magic (paladins and rogues)  will
only need to carry a maximum of 4 spellbooks. The realms each have
32 spells and each book has 8 spells.

=== Character Classes and Spell Ability ===

WARRIORS: Warriors cast no spells. They hate magic. In fact,  they
even gain experience for destroying high level spellbooks.

MAGES:  Mages have the least restrictions in choosing and learning
spells. They can freely choose any two realms when a character  is
created: in the current version, all eight realms are available to
them,  although their natural inclination makes Life magic  fairly
hard  for them. Otherwise, a mage tends to learn and cast all  the
spells  in  his/her  realms better than any other  character.  The
ability  select  both realms of magic (which  no  other  character
class  can  do)  allows  the best support  for  experimenting  and
combining  different  realms,  and, thus,  for  different  playing
strategies as well.

PRIESTS: There are two types of priests in Cthangband: the 'light'
priests,  who  select Life magic as their primary realm,  and  the
'dark'  priests  ('Cultists'), who select Death magic  instead  of
Life  magic.  No  priest can have both realms.  Priests  can  also
select  a  second realm from the other six realms, and  should  be
able to learn all spells in it as well, even if not as efficiently
as   mages.   However,  when  learning  spells,   priests   cannot
voluntarily  decide which spells to study: they are rewarded  with
new   prayers   by  their  patron  deities,  with  no   money-back
satisfaction  guarantee. It should also be noted  that  since  the
natural tendencies of a priest are towards Life magic, priests who
select  Life magic are be able to learn their prayers  faster  and
better than their evil colleagues with Death magic.

ROGUES:  There  are several subtypes of Rogues in Cthangband:  the
realm  of  magic chosen by the Rogue determines the exact  'type'.
The  common  Thief,  agent  of the underworld,  will  probably  be
content with Folk magic and its wide applicability. The Burglar on
the  other  hand, is more interested in the Sorcery spells,  which
allow  him  or  her  to  do  the job  fast  and  efficiently.  The
Assassin's partiality for Death magic is well known, and they  are
feared for it. Finally, there is the Card Sharp, who will opt  for
Planar   magic,  and  shuffles  the  tarot  decks   with   amazing
proficiency.  All Rogues have certain limitations on which  spells
they can learn, and they are not too fast to learn new spells.

RANGERS:  All rangers are trained in Nature magic, and all  Nature
spells  are available to them. They even learn these spells almost
as  fast  as  mages. They can also select a secondary realm  (from
Corporeal,  Folk,  Planar, Chaos and Death),  but  they  are  slow
learners in them, and may find themselves unable to learn some  of
the highest level spells.

PALADINS:  Paladins  are trained in Life magic  (only),  and  they
despise  the  other  realms of magic (which  they  regard  as  the
Devil's  work). Like priests, they cannot select which prayers  to
learn but are rewarded with new prayers by their deities. They can
learn  all Life spells, but not as fast as priests. Death  Knights
study  Death  magic instead of Life magic, but in  other  respects
they  are similar to normal paladins. Death Knights can learn  all
Death  spells.  The endless enmity between these two  subtypes  is
most  evident  in  their attitudes to other realms  of  magic:  an
'ordinary'  detests  the  other realms of  magic  (than  Life)  so
strongly  that he or she will even gain experience for  destroying
their high-level spellbooks. A Death Knight, on the other hand, is
very  tolerant of the other realms -- to annoy Paladins,  perhaps,
if  for  no  other reason. A Death Knight will, however,  be  very
offended  by the sight of Life spellbook, and will do anything  to
destroy it; and this will even give him or her experience, if  the
Life spellbook in question is a high level one.

WARRIOR-MAGES: Warrior-mages begin the game with Folk  magic,  and
they  can freely select another realm of magic. Although  they  do
not gain new spells as fast as regular mages, they will eventually
learn  every  spell in both realms, thus making a very competitive
choice for players who appreciate Folk magic.

CHAOS  WARRIORS: Chaos Warriors are, as one might expect,  trained
in  Chaos  magic.  They are not interested in any  other  form  of
magic. They can learn every Chaos spell.

CHAOS  MAGES: Chaos Mages are similar to Chaos Warriors  in  their
outlook, although they are more magical by nature so are  able  to
learn another realm of magic as well as Chaos.

DRUIDS:  Druids are specialist priests. They forego the  study  of
Life or Death, in order to concentrate solely on Nature magic.

MONKS:  Monks  study the martial arts and try to  attain  physical
perfection. As such, the have no time for any other realm of magic
than  Corporeal. Even so, their physical training is paramount  to
them and their magical studies tend to come second.

MINDCRAFTERS: Although the powers of a Mindcrafter may  seem  like
magic, this is not - strictly speaking - the case. They are mental
powers,   independent   of   the  ordinary   sources   of   magic.
Consequently, Mindcrafters are not interested in 'magic' and learn
no spells.

HIGH  MAGES: High mages are mages who specialise in one particular
field  of  magic  and learn it very well -- much better  than  the
ordinary mage. For the price of giving up a second realm of magic,
they  gain substantial benefits in the mana costs, minimum levels,
and failure rates in the spells of the realm of their speciality.

=== The Realms of Magic ===

LIFE:  Life is magic is 'good' magic; it relies mostly on  healing
and  protective spells. It does have a few attack spells as  well,
but  these are mostly used for harming and banishing foul  minions
of  evil. It is rumoured that there is a secret high level  prayer
which  will make the priest (or paladin) completely impervious  to
all forms of hostile action.

SORCERY:  Sorcery  is  a 'meta' realm, including  enchantment  and
general  spells.  It provides superb protection  spells  (such  as
Teleport  spells  for fleeing and even Globe of  Invulnerability),
spells  to enhance your odds in combat (Slow Monster, Haste  Self,
Confuse Monster) and, most importantly, a vast selection of spells
for  gathering information. In addition to the usual detection and
identify spells, one of the standard spellbooks has a spell called
Identify  True, which gives you full knowledge of a given  object!
In  the  rare  books, there are spells with which you can  enchant
your  items  or turn unwanted items to gold. However, Sorcery  has
one  weakness:  it  has no spells to deal direct  damage  to  your
enemies.

FOLK:  Even  more  than Sorcery, Folk magic is  a  general-purpose
realm of magic. It attempts to encompass all 'useful' spells  from
all  realms,  and almost succeeds, with the probable exception  of
*Identify*.  This is the downside of Folk magic: while  Folk  does
have all the necessary 'tool' spells for a dungeon delver, it  has
no  ultra-powerful high level spells. As a consequence,  all  Folk
spellbooks can be bought in town. It should also be noted that the
'specialised' realms (i.e. other than Folk) usually offer the same
spell  at a lower level and cost. Folk magic is therefore  perhaps
not recommendable as one's only realm of magic, but it should be a
very  nice addition to fill up the gaps in the selection  of  tool
spells in another realm.

PLANAR:  Planar  magic  seems  an  independent  source  of  power,
although  its  supposed  association with  Chaos  magic  has  been
mentioned  in  several places. Although it lacks the unpredictable
chaotic  side  effects of Chaos magic, it has a few  spells  whose
exact  effects seem more or less random. One such spell  is  Tarot
Draw:  the Planar spellcaster carries around a Tarot deck and  the
Tarot  Draw spell allows the caster to shuffle the deck  and  pick
one card at random. The effect depends on the card picked, and  is
not  always pleasant. Planar gateways are also a major  method  of
transportation:  Planar magic has, indeed, an admirable  selection
of  teleportation spells. Since the Planar gateways  can  also  be
used  to  summon  other  creatures, Planar magic  has  an  equally
impressive  selection  of  summoning  spells.  However,  not   all
monsters  appreciate being drawn to another place  by  magic.  The
only  summoned  creatures  whose loyalty  is  guaranteed  are  the
Phantasmal Servants, who lack a will of their own (but can develop
one, if you treat them badly).

NATURE:  Early  levels may be rather difficult for  a  spellcaster
relying  on  Nature magic, as the early spells offer only  limited
protection, detection and curing capabilities. However, at  higher
levels   there   are  very  useful  offensive  spells   available,
especially  should  the spellcaster be lucky  enough  to  find  an
extremely rare spellbook called "Nature's Wrath". Nature also  has
a  spell  of  Herbal Healing, which is the only  powerful  healing
spell outside the realm of Life magic.

CHAOS:  There  are  few  types  of magic  more  unpredictable  and
difficult  to control than Chaos magic. Chaos is the very  element
of destruction, and the Chaos spells are the most terrible weapons
imaginable.  From Magic Missile and Acid Bolt to the medium  level
Fire Ball and and Doom Bolt, and finally to the awesome spells  of
Invoke  Chaos,  Mana  Storm and Call the  Void,  Chaos  offers  an
unsurpassable arsenal of attack spells. The caster can  also  call
on  the  primal  forces  of Chaos to induce mutations  in  his/her
opponents  and  even  him/herself, but  otherwise,  Chaos  has  no
protective  spells.  Beware, though, Chaos  spells  are  known  to
backfire  easily and product undesired effects. This is especially
true  in  the  version 2.1.0 of Cthangband and  later,  where  the
forces  of  Chaos can easily twist the hapless individual  foolish
enough to invoke them, turning them horrendous spawns of Chaos.

DEATH:  There is neither fouler nor more evil category  of  spells
than  the  necromantic  spells of Death Magic.  These  spells  are
relatively hard to learn, but at higher levels the spells give the
caster  power  over  living and the (un)dead.  Poison,  vampirism,
death spells and even hellfire can be directed by the caster,  but
the  most  powerful spells need his/her own blood  as  the  focus,
often hurting the caster in the process of casting. Should a Death
wizard find the legendary tome Necronomicon, he can expect to gain
very great powers indeed, but at a cost: few that have studied the
accursed tome have retained their sanity.

CORPOREAL: Corporeal magic concentrates on the body. In fact there
are  no  spells  in  the realm that effect anything  else,  except
indirectly (e.g. Terror Mask alters your visage in such a horrible
way that it will scare most creatures away from you). However, for
detection and sensing spells it can't be beaten.

=== Notes on Summoned / Charmed Creatures ===

A  friendly creature can be a mixed blessing. At first sight,  one
might  think that they could make the game much easier. It  is  of
course  highly satisfying to send your pet Hell Wyrm into a  Troll
pit and wait outside, listening for the howls of agony and terror,
the sounds of guts splattering, bones crunching and so on. But one
should  not  expect to gain any experience for such a combat:  you
will  only gain experience for creatures to which you deliver  the
deathblow yourself. New experiences require hazards; nobody  gains
experience  by  sitting home watching the TV.  Secondly,  friendly
monsters  are  often so eager to destroy your opponents  they  may
forget  all  about you, and you get trampled under their  feet  as
they  charge  at  your foe. They are not as smart as  the  regular
monsters,  since they have given up their free will to serve  you.
So  don't  stand  next  to that Snaga when your  pet  Chaos  Drake
breathes!  Pets  are  also rather easily irritable.  Once  you  do
something that causes the slightest discomfort to them, they  will
revert  to  their  normal behaviour and consider  you  their  main
target. This is something to think about before lighting up a room
if  you  have pet orcs. Needless to say, nobody wants to  be  your
friend if you are aggravating him or her. Finally, it takes a  lot
of  mental  energy  to  maintain  the  control  over  the  charmed
monsters. The first monster or the first few are 'free', but after
that  maintaining the control will start taxing your  mana  regain
rate. The higher the sum of the levels of your pets the less  mana
you  will be able to regain. Keep this in mind if you have  a  pet
that can summon or otherwise produce more pets...

=== Hints and Tips ===

If  you  miss the 'old' magic user, try picking Sorcery and  Chaos
magic  to  get the most commonly used mage spells early on  (Magic
Missile, Detect Monsters + Traps + etc, Identify).

It  is  generally a good idea to pick one defensive realm and  one
offensive realm. For example try using life or sorcery with  chaos
or  death magic. Nature is somewhat neutral: it has both offensive
and defensive spells, but is not very generous with either, not at
least  early in the game. Nature should work best with  characters
who  can  use  other  means to survive until  they  get  the  more
powerful high level spells. If you pick the realms always  in  the
same  order  (e.g. nature as your first realm and  chaos  as  your
second  realm, not the other way around) you will be less confused
when trying to pick the correct spellbook to use in the game.

If  you still get confused trying to select the correct spellbook,
try using macros (either the 'full' macros or inscriptions).