THE MONSTER RACE
------------------

The 'Monster' race lets you incarnate a monster. During character creation,
you will be asked to choose a letter that will represent the monster kind
you will play as. (refer to the list of commands to see the meaning of
every letters). Then, once you choose a kind, you'll be able to select
a particular specie within that kind. Some kinds have more choices than
others. You'll be able to select a creature of up to level 15 in terms
on dungeon depth level.

After that, you will automatically be assigned the class "Monster", which
is the special class that Monsters uses. Unlike regular races, you do not
get to change your class. Instead, the class has it's own abilities to
improve various monster features. And monsters get the option to evolve into
stronger ones during the game. One of the main challenge of the Monster race
is choosing the right creature amongst the right kind. While a particular
kind may seem more appealing at first, you will soon discover that many
individual monsters have abilities or features that makes them powerful in
their own right, and that built in particular ways, can become very powerful.

BENEFITS OF THE MONSTER RACE
------------------------------

Monsters receive natural bonus to their strength, dexterity, intelligence
and wisdom. How much you get depends on your level and on the monster you
are playing. In addition, you get the following benefits:

- Bonus hp per levels. Higher level monsters tend to receive more that
lower ones.
- Permanent radius 5 light(it is assumed that monsters came from dungeons
and caves, and therefore sees well in the dark).
- Innate elemental resistances. What you get depends on the monster you play.
Beware, if your monster has weaknesses, you will also get them!
- Innate status resistances to either fear, sleep/paralysis or confusion.
Again, what you get depends on which monster you play.
- Speed increase by 1 every 5 levels.
- You can get extra attacks if your monster has two or more melee per turns.
- Innate mountain-climbing ability.

EQUIPMENT AND ESSENCES
------------------------

Unlike normal races, many monsters cannot equip the same items as human and
humanoid races do. Instead, Monsters gets the ability to capture an enemy
monster's essence upon defeating it. Whenever you defeat an enemy as a
monster, an essence will be dropped, and you will be able to equip it in
one of your monster's Essence slots. This essence may contains bonus to
stats, base AC, a resistance or even customizable points that you can
assign at will using the 'N' command, as you would with a levelable or
crafted item. The bonus of the essence are heavily influenced by the
original creature that dropped it. Though all bonus are random, they
are influenced by the creature's aptitudes. Therefore, a monster with
a high natural AC has more chances of giving a big base AC bonus. A monster
with high strength has more chance of giving high strength than other stats.
And a monster with overall low stats and base AC has more chance of giving
more customizable points to make up for it. The amount of bonus you get
is based on the creature's depth and level. Defeating an elite, boss or
unique monster also result in a better essence. And finally, if the defeated
monster had any spells, the essence will contain them all, and you'll be
able to activate it to cast the spells of the defeated creature!

You'll notice that the first essence in your list of Essence slots is
called the "Main Essence". If you are unarmed(or cannot wield weapons), the
essence in that slot has additional effects. By default, it will replace
your natural attack, and instead, you'll deal damages based on that
equipped essence's damages and elemental type, rather than your natural
attacks. You can use the 'K' command and turn off that feature if you don't
want to replace your natural attacks. Also, this essence will provide
a bonus to spells, essence activations and innate magic attacks of your
monster. Again, note that you will not benefit from any of this if you
wield weapons.

Finally, not all monsters have the same number of essences slots available.
Standard races have standard equipment slots, and for every equipment slots
that are missing, your monster will gain one Essence slot. Therefore, a
monster that is missing the boots and amulet slots will gain two Essence
slots. A monster that cannot equip regular items at all will have 13 slots
for equippable essences! And some monsters have no essence slots at all,
in which case they will have the same equipment slots as other races.
Generally, humanoid enemies such as 'p' or 'h' have no essence slots and
have the same equipment as regular races, while monstrous or animalistic
creatures will have all 13 slots. Demihumans or monsters with humanoid
shape or human features will often have both essence slots and some regular
slots, numbers varying from monsters to monsters.

UNARMED COMBAT
----------------

Monsters that cannot equip weapons should use the Martial Arts skill to
enhance their melee attacks. However, for Monsters, the skill works differently
than for normal players. It has the following differences:

- The base unarmed damages are equal to your natural attack's base damages,
or equipped main essence. The elemental type is also determined by your
natural attacks or your main essence.
- Every points in the skill boosts your base damages by 1%.
- The skill doesn't provide any extra blows.
- Unarmed blows are treated as weight 40 instead of 10.
- You will not gain the "unarmed blocking" feat.

Otherwise, it's the exact same thing. You can use all the skill's feats, and
fully benefit from other bonuses.

SPELLCASTING
--------------

Monsters uses intelligence-based spellcasting for their spells and innate
magical abilities. If you use the 'm' command, you'll be able to use one
of your monster's innate magical abilities, if any. Various monsters can
have many spells of various types, such as offensive spells, summoning,
healing or stats boosting. Occasionally, some enemies may have unique
special spells. These spells are affected by your spellcraft skill. As for
the specialized schools skills, they will not improve offensive spells
damages or summons, although they can sometimes affect the success of some
types of powers. (such as Alteration affecting the success rate of
Life Blast type abilities)

If you use 'p', you'll be able to access the standard spellcasting menu,
allowing you to create regular spells. Standard spellcasting rules apply.
Note that monsters uses intelligence and mana to improve spells, they
do not use wisdom.

Finally, note that both innate magic abilities and regular spells have
their power increased by wielding a rod, like other races. In the case
of essence-based monsters, the Main Essence acts like a rod or staff for
the purpose of increasing base spells damages.

EVOLVING
----------

After gaining some levels, your will be able to evolve to a stronger monster
kind by using the 'Y' command. Once your level reaches the depth of a higher
monster of the kind you chose, you may evolve as it. For example, if you
play a Skeleton, once you reach level 10, you'll be able to play as a
Skeleton Warrior, Skeleton Archer or Skeleton Mage. These evolutions
usually offers more powers and better stats, although you have to be careful.
Just because a monster is a higher evolution doesn't mean it will fit your
character's build, so keep that in mind! A spellcaster monster won't help
you if you built your character for melee! Sometimes, a lesser monster
might have special attacks that suits your strategy more. Make sure you
consider the "Small but Deadly" ability, which empowers weaker monsters,
before deciding if you should evolve or not. A good tactic is to wait
until you actually encounter and fight the monster, so you know what it
is capable of.

Another thing to know about evolution is that it is possible to evolve
prematurely by carrying essences. For each essences of a specific monster
of your chosen kind that you carry in your inventory, the level requirement
for that evolution will be reduced by 1. For example, you normally need
to be level 10 to evolve into a Skeleton Warrior. However, if you carry
2 essences of Skeleton Warriors in your inventory, you'll be able to
evolve into it at level 8. You can obtain up to 20 in terms of reduction.
Note that equipped essences do not count. You need to carry them in your
inventory.

Also, while it is possible to evolve into a higher level monster, it is
not possible to regress to a previous, lower level monster. So consider
this when deciding if you should evolve or not. If you are having an easy
time dealing with the monsters, and you are unsure about the evolution,
perhaps it is best to keep improving your current form rather than risking
an evolution to something that might end up ruining your strategy.

Finally, the general rule is that you can only evolve into a monster of the
same kind(same letter) as you. However, there are exceptions:

Lesser Dragons(d) can evolve into Ancient Dragons(D).
Skeletons(s) can evolve into Lich(L).
Canines(C) can evolve into Hounds(Z).
Humans(p) can evolve into Giants(P).

But remember that once you evolve into these "superior" forms, they cannot
return to the "lesser" forms, and sometimes the "superior" form isn't always
better. For example, while Lichs(L) makes good spellcasters, a melee monster
is much better with the standard Skeleton(s).

If you decide to evolve, abilities spent into specific monster attacks and
spells will be returned to you, and these abilities will be reset. The
main abilities, however, will not, so plan your character carefully!

ABILITIES
-----------

1. Greater Evolution(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your strength, dexterity, intelligence and wisdom by
        (chosen monster's depth)%.
Extra points: +(chosen monster's depth)% to stats.

This passive ability increases your main offensive base stats by an amount
based on the depth level of the monster you're playing. The more powerful
your monster is, the higher the bonus will be. If you want to aim for high
base stats, consider placing points in this ability, especially if your
monster kind has powerful evolutions.

2. Small but Deadly(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your strength, dexterity, intelligence and wisdom by
        1% + 1% for every experience levels above your monster's depth.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to bonus.

This passive ability increases your main offensive base stats by an amount
based on how much higher your level is compared to your monster's depth.
The opposite of Greater Evolution, this ability is meant for players who
plays with weaker monster kinds, or prefer to stick to a lower monster
for personnal preference or because that particular monster has a particular
attack that is part of the player's strategy. With this, even a lower
monster can still get high stats later on.

3. Improved Magics(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase damages and success rate of your spells.
Bonus: +50% to offensive and healing spells damages/power.
       +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
       +10% to stats boosters power.
       +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.
Extra points: +50% to spells damages.
              +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
              +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.

This passive ability increases the damages of all your monster's spells.
While you can invest your ability points in a specific spell for twice
the effect, if the monster you're playing has several diverse spells,
then this ability might be a worthy option because it will improve all
of them as opposed to just one. Also, if your spell needs to win a
resistance roll to work(such as status ailment spells), it will improve
the success rate of these spells.

4. Inner Elemental Mastery(Active/Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase damages of a chosen element by 10% of your resistance to it.
        Can also be activated for a "Piercing Spells" effect.
Damages bonus: +(10% of resistance)% to specific element damages.
Piercing power for activated effect: 15
Extra points: +(10% of resistance)% to specific element damages.
              +15 to piercing power.

When you increase this ability for the first time, you will be asked to
choose between 12 of the 16 main elements, and you might also get some other
choices if your monster has a specific resistance to something else. Once you
choose the element, this ability will increase the damages of any attacks
of the chosen element by 10% of your resistance to it. This ability is
obsiously meant for monsters with natural immunities, of which many have,
but you can still benefit from it even if you don't have one by equipping
essences or items that gives you resistances.

5. Improved Essence Activations(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase damages and success rate of activated essences.
Bonus: +50% to offensive and healing spells damages/power.
       +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
       +10% to stats boosters power.
       +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.
Extra points: +50% to spells damages.
              +10 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
              +1 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.

This passive ability increases the damages and success rate of the activation
of Essences. This is basically just like Improved Magics, but for activations.
If your monster cannot inherently cast spells, equipped essences with spells
and raising this ability is a way of getting the magical attacks you normally
wouldn't have access to. Keep in mind that most of them will require the
essence to recharge, so it's a good idea to equip more than one essence with
spells if you plan on using this ability.

6. Improved Defense(Passive, level 1)

Effect: Increase your base AC based on your monster's base AC.
Bonus: 25% of chosen monster's base AC.
Extra points: +25% of chosen monster's base AC to base AC.

This passive ability increases your base AC based on how much the monster you
chose has as innate base AC. Depending on the chosen monster, this ability
can provide a significant bonus, which is further improved greatly by
Agility. However, note that lower depth monsters have very low base AC and
if you play as one, you might not get much out of this ability, which is
meant to be used by monsters with high AC.

7. Improved Counters(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improve your chance of blocking with blocking counters, and improves
        damages of returning counters.
Base blocking chance bonus: +5
Extra points: +5 to base blocking chance.
              +1 multiplier to returned damages for returning counters.

This passive ability makes your chosen monster's special counters more
effective. Many monsters have the ability to block or even reflect an
incoming attack, and if you have such an ability, this will improve it. Note
that in some cases, there may not be a blocking test and it's just a static
percentile chance to block the attack. In this case, this ability has
no effects on it.

8. Improved Passive Powers(Passive, level 6)

Effect: Improve special passive abilities your monster may have.
Extra points: Improves powers further.

Some monsters have special passive powers unique to them. If they do,
this ability will make them more powerful in various ways(increased damages,
success rate, healing, etc...), based on the nature of the power.

Note that by default, these powers are off. Use the 'K' command to toggle
them On and Off.

9. Racial Champion(Active/Passive, level 6)

Effect: Increase your charisma. Can also be activated to rally monsters of
        the same kind to your cause.
Charisma bonus: +(monster's depth)%.
Activated Effect's Power: 40
Radius: 3
Can be resisted: Yes(mind).
Extra points: +(monster's depth)% to charisma.
              +40 to activated effect's power.
              +1 to radius every 20 points.

This ability has two effects. The first one is a passive bonus to your
Charisma, which can be very useful if you have summoning spells. The
second one is a charm-type effect that affects monsters of the same
kind as yours(has the same letter). The power is high, though it will
not work on elites, bosses and uniques. Monsters of a different kind
will be unaffected.

Note that this ability doesn't take into account "greater" evolutions.
For example, a lesser dragon('d') cannot persuade an ancient dragon('D').

10. Paragon Elder Monster(Passive, level 10)

Effect: Become an upper class and respected monster. Improves all your
        abilities and may give you a special rank.
Bonus to all stats: 5%.
Extra points: +5% to all stats.
              At level 10 and higher, you become an Elite monster, and
              may pick a special ability. At level 20, you become a Boss
              monster, and you may pick a second ability. You may then
              pick one every 10 points, until you learn them all.

This passive ability will improve all your stats based on your base
stats. However, it's true power is to give you access to some of the
elite and boss monsters powers. Your color will also change to the elite
or boss color! Here are the abilities you can choose:

Halve Damages:
Damages you take are reduced by 50%. This apply to all forms of damages,
both physical and magical. This can be especially powerful if you play
as a monster that has a high hp and defense.

Double Weapon Damages:
Melee and ranged attacks will do double damages. If you use a lot of these,
this ability will make them much more powerful. This works with not just
your special attacks, but any normal attacks and with any weapons or
unarmed attacks.

Double Magic Damages:
Your monster's special magic attacks will do double damages. If you use spells
a lot, this will make them stronger. This will also double any magical attacks
from essences activation. However, it does not improve regular spells or other
magic attacks.

Crushing Blows:
Your melee attacks have a chance to cause paralysis, confusion and a 25%
hit rate reduction. The monsters will attempt a strength-based resistance
roll to avoid the effect. The power of this ability depends on how you use
it:
- Normal weapon/unarmed attack or special in a combat feat: power of 5/points.
- Special melee attack outside of combat feat: power of 20/points + strength.
- Special melee attack outside of combat feat,
  and with Power Attack: power of (20/points + strength) * (Power Attack mod)

The power is low with normal attacks, but keep in mind that with martial arts,
you will get a lot of blows. The paralysis and confusion will not work if the
enemy is resistant to those effects, but otherwise will last for 5 turns.
The hit rate reduction is permanent and will work on any enemies.

Return 50% Melee damages:
Enemies that attacks you in melee combat will have 50% of damages
returned to them. Even if they miss you, they still take damages.
Note that they are still typed damages, so the monster could be
immune. The returned damages receives a multiplier for every points
in this ability.

Return 50% Magic damages:
Enemies that cast an offensive spell at you will be returned 50% of
the spell's damages. Even if you avoid the spell, the spell will
still be returned, although like the melee returning ability, they
are typed damages. The returned damages receives a multiplier for
every points in this ability.


MONSTER INNATE ATTACKS AND SPELLS:

As a monster, you can also choose to place points in any of your innate
melee attacks, ranged attacks or spells. That has the following benefits:

Melee:

Most monsters have melee innate melee attacks. As a monster player, you
can use any of these moves as special attacks and even as combat feats.
Special melee attacks works with both martial arts and weapons, meaning
that both humanoid and non-humanoid monsters can fully benefit from
them. Special melee attacks will add their innate damage rolls to the
base damages of your melee attacks.

You can choose to places ability points in these attacks, and it will
have the following benefits:

- If used as a combat feat, the attacks gain 10% extra damages per points.
If used outside of a combat feat combo, it will be 20% extra damages
per points. This apply to the final damages, not just the innate damages
bonus, so this can become very powerful for any monsters!
- The attack gains a radius of 1 every 10 points.
- +20% bonus to hit rate per points.

Note: These special attacks are treated as melee attacks for the purpose
of counters and hit rate tests. However, non-physical special attacks will
hurt elites/bosses immune to physical attacks. Of course, elemental special
attacks will not hurt magic immunes. Also, the special attacks damages
are never returned through standard returning abilities.

Ranged:

Innate ranged attacks are often used by humanoid monsters. As a result,
they can be combined with ranged weapons for maximum effectiveness.
If used without a ranged weapon, it will be treated as a magic attack,
but will use the innate attack damages and will use dex-based ranged
damages calculation. Like melee attacks, the attack's innate damages
roll will be added to the normal base ammo damages.

Note that using a special ranged attack with a ranged weapon still
consumes ammos like a normal ranged attack would. Also, the attack's
elemental type will be the one used by your attack, regardless of
shooter or ammo.

Innate ranged attacks without weapons are treated as magical attacks,
and therefore do not have hit rate test. However, you'll need
intelligence and wisdom to bypass magic counters of enemies, not
dexterity.

Placing points in these attacks have the following benefits:

Ranged weapons:
- +20% additional damages per points.
- +1 radius every 10 points.
- +20% bonus to hit rate per points.
- Every 3 points, you can use the attack with another of your extra
shots, if any. So if you have two extra shots in one hand, you
need 3 points in the ability to use it twice in a row. Note that
each ranged weapons is treated separately, so if you wield two
ranged weapons, and have 2 shots in each hands, 3 points in this
ability will allow you to use the ability twice in a row for each
weapons, so a total of 4 times.

Without ranged weapons:
- +1 multiplier to damages per points.
- +1 radius every 10 points.

Magic:

Monsters innate spells are casted using either intelligence or wisdom,
whichever is the highest, though they consume mana, so intelligence
is generally the better choice. Placing points in a specific spell
has twice the benefits of the general Improved Magics ability, with
some extras. Here's the benefits:

+1 multiplier to offensive and healing spells damages/power.
+20 to spell's power for overcoming resistance rolls(if any).
+20% to stats boosters power.
+2 to maximum summoning depth for summoning spells.
+1 extra summon for every 5 points with summoning spells.
+1 to duration of stats boosters and hasting spells.

If the monster has any unique special powers, placing points in them
will improve them in various ways, depending on the nature of that power.

Note: The Improved Magics ability and specific powers are additive in
terms of bonus. Placing one points in a specific power and one point
in Improved Magics results in a bonus of 150% to damages.


Final note: You may notice that the names of the attacks might not
always match the type of weapons you are using them with. However,
the name of the attacks do not affect the usability of the attacks
in any way, so just because the attack is named "Sword" or "Arrow"
doesn't mean you can't use it with a mace or a gun.
