--- Basic Info ---

At the start of the game, you will be asked to choose one or more
classes. You may finish the choosing process by hitting the ESCAPE key
instead of choosing a class. The order of your choices does matter, as
classes which are chosen earlier will advance in levels much quicker.

Note : If you wish to play a Ranger, Paladin, or non-recommended class (for
your race), choose that class first, as you will not be allowed to take a
second class.

The player info screen (accessed with 'C') shows class and level info 
for each class.

To use spell and prayer books, the relevant class must be active. 
Use '[' and ']' to switch between classes.

--- Entering a new class ---

With more than one class, you will get the best number of attacks and
fastest pseudo-id out of all the classes that you are a member
of. Skills are calculated as an average of how good each class is at
each skill. You will gain class intrinstics and abilities regardless
of which class is active, although you will have to switch to a class
if you want to use their spellcasting abilities.

Penalties to spell failure rates are imposed if you wear gloves
(except for silk gloves) or if your total armour worn weighs more than
300lbs. Likewise, prayer failure rates are penalized if you wield a
bladed weapon or if your total armour worn weighs more than 400lbs.

Your HP is calculated as an average of what each individual class
would get. Mana has been split up into piety (which priests and
paladins use) and mana (which every other spellcaster uses).

Experience gained is usually divided between all available
classes. However, rouges and tricksters are the only classes to gain
experience from unlocking and disarming chests, traps and
doors. Likewise, when a spell or prayer is used for the first time,
only the magic-using class will gain the experience.

Most races can only have 2 classes. Half-elves, high-elves, dunadan and caveman
can have 3, humans, yeeks and maia can have 4.

If you play a non-recommended combination of race and class, you will
not be able to choose any further classes. Likewise, you will not be
able to choose a non-recommended class after choosing an okay one.

Note : Experience draining affects the class which you have the highest
level in.

--- Combinations allowed (table) ---

Rangers and Paladins are not shown in this table, as they cannot multiclass.

             War Mag Pri Thi Ill Arc Dea Ber Mon Rune Cru Shi Slay
Warrior           Y   Y   Y   Y       Y           Y        Y
Mage          Y       Y           Y   Y       Y                Y
Priest        Y   Y           Y   Y       Y   Y            Y
Thief         Y                   Y   Y       Y                Y
Illusionist   Y       Y           Y   Y       Y                Y
Archer            Y   Y   Y   Y       Y       Y   Y   Y    Y   Y
Death Priest  Y   Y       Y   Y   Y       Y   Y            Y
Berserker             Y               Y       Y       Y        Y
Monk              Y   Y   Y   Y   Y   Y   Y       Y   Y    Y   Y
Runecaster    Y                   Y           Y
Crusader                          Y       Y   Y
Shifter       Y       Y           Y   Y       Y                Y
Slayer            Y       Y   Y   Y       Y   Y            Y

There are four fighter-type classes - Warrior, Archer, Berserker, and
Monk. Warrior is the base fighter-class, not specialized in any area, and
cannot combine with other fighter classes. Berserkers cannot be Archers, as
they hate to use missile weapons. Any other combination of fighter-classes is
allowed.

Only one of the five magic-using classes may be chosen (Mage, Thief,
Illusionist, Runecaster, Shifter) as Thieves are lower-powered versions of
Mages, and a character can only learn one of these different types of
magic. Also, Runecasters cannot be any type of priest, as they have no respect
for prayer books.

Those who choose a magic class cannot be Berserkers or Crusaders, as neither
have any time for using magic and prefer to bash things over the head.

Only one of the four priestly classes may be chosen (Holy Priest, Death Priest,
Crusader and Slayer) as they each pray in different ways. Crusaders and Slayers
cannot be Warrios, as they already have good fighting skills. Holy Priests
cannot also be Thieves, as they are opposed to this lifestyle.

--- Switch class forwards ---

This command is used to switch between different classes, if you are
multiclassing. You will be switched to the next class which you are a
member of. You only need to switch classes in order to cast spells,
use prayers, or show information about your experience.

--- Switch class backwards ---

Like switch class forwards, but switches to previous class.

