NEWANGBAND NEWBIES GUIDE
--------------------------

Welcome to NewAngband! This guide has been written in order to help
beginner players to understand how NewAngband works. However, it can
also be used by experienced players, who may have forgotten some of
the game's elements.

Before we begin, I assume that if you play NewAngband, you already
played Angband, and thus you know the basic elements of the game.
In this guide, I shall tell you about every particular aspects
of NewAngband, in order to make your gaming experience better.

This version of the guide has been updated for NewAngband 1.7.1.

NEW STATS SYSTEM
------------------
NewAngband 1.6.0(and higher) has given up with the old stats system, 
and now use a new, simpler and more effective stat system. Now, no 
longer will you get a complicated value like 18/36 and 18/97 for 
a stat.

At the beginning of the game, all stats begins at 5. Some may be a
little higher or lower depending on your race. Every time you gain
a level, you will be awarded two stat points which you can use to
increase on of your stats. To do this, go into the character's
display('C'), and press 's'. If you have at least one stat point
left, you will be able to raise one of your stats. Now, here's
a detailed description of what each stats will do:

STRENGTH:

Strength measures how strong you are and how much you can carry. High
strength can provide extremely powerful bonuses to melee characters.
If you plan to be a melee specialised character, you will probably
want to have a high strength, as it will allow you to do more damages
in combat, and to carry heavier stuff such as powerful armors and
heavy two-handed weapons.

Effects of Strength:
        - +5 to_d bonus per points.
	- +1% to melee damages for every points.
        - Increased carrying capacity.
        - +1 to_hit per two points.
        - Increase number of blows, along with dexterity.

INTELLIGENCE:

Intelligence measures how good you are at learning spells and using
magic. Having a high intelligence is a must for any magic users.
The more you have, the more spell points you will get, and more
spells will become available to you. Characters with five or less
intelligence will get no spell points, which mean they cannot cast
any spells.

Effects of Intelligence:
        - +10 mana per points.
	- You gain 1 extra skill points for every 12 points of the
	  average between Intelligence and Wisdom.

WISDOM:

Widows measures a character's spiritual abilities, self-control and
the overall maturity of the character. Wisdom is a very useful stat,
as it allow you to resist many vicious effects caused by monsters,
such as fear, confusion and stat draining. But the most useful benefit
of having a high wisdom is that you will gain more skill points per
levels. Therefore, is it wise to give every characters a few points
in wisdom, as it will always be benefical to them.

Effects of Wisdom:
        - Increase resistance to effects.
        - You gain 1 extra skill points for every 12 points of the
	  average between Intelligence and Wisdom.

DEXTERITY:

Dexterity measures the character's ability to aim right, to hit enemies
and to dodge their blows more easily. Dexterity is very helpful to melee
characters, and is a must for any archer-type character. Higher dexterity
mean higher to_hit, which mean you will be able to land more damaging
blows to your enemies. Also, a high dexterity will improve your shooting
multiplier, making your ranged attacks much more powerful.

Effects of Dexterity:
        - +10 to_hit per points.
	- +5 to_d to ranged attacks.
        - +1% to ranged damages for every points.
        - +1 to AC for every two points.
        - Increase number of blows, among with Strength.

CONSTITUTION:

Constitution measures how tough the character is and how much damage
he or she can take before dying. Constitution raises your hp, and having
a high hp can be EXTREMELY helpful. All characters should consider
putting some points into constitution, especially melee fighters who
may need to endure a few ranged attacks before reaching the foes.
Keep in mind that there are some life boosting abilities and items,
and that the more hp you have, the more you will get from these bonuses.

Effects of Constitution:
        - +15 hp per points.
        - 1% chance to recover from stun and paralyze for every points.

CHARISMA:

Charisma measures the character's personnality, personnal charm and
magnetism, as well as the character's ability to lead. Charisma can
be very useful if you plan on playing a Leader character, or if you
use a lot of summoning spells. Charisma will raise your Leader
Multiplier, making all friendly creatures much more powerful.
Additionally, charisma help lowering the price in stores, so if
you have a high charisma, you will pay less for items.

Effects of Charisma:
        - Increase monsters's melee and magic attacks. 
        - +5 bonus to_hit for friendly monsters for every points
          above 5.
        - Reduce the prices in stores.

SKILLS
--------

NewAngband 1.6.0(and higher) also introduces a new skill system, 
along with the stats. Upon each levels, the player will gain 
two(more if you have high wisdom) skill point to raise one of many 
skills. To raise a skill, go on the character info screen(by pressing 'C'), 
and press 'k'. If you still have some skill points available, you 
will be able to raise one of the many skills NewAngband has to offer. 
To learn more about what each skills do, refer to the Skills Guide.

*NEW* CLASS SYSTEM(1.7.0 and higher)
--------------------------------------

NewAngband offers an original multi-class system. It was the very first
variant to introduce a multi-class system(no, it's not the new MultiBand!
MultiBand was *NOT* the first multi-class variant! NewAngband *IS* the
first variant with multi-class!). When you create a character, after
choosing your race, you get the Apprentice class. This is a basic class,
with no advantages and no special abilities.

To change class, use the 'Y' command. A menu will appear, and you will
to choose either a Basic Class or an Advanced Class. Note that you must
be in the town to change class, you may not do so in the dungeon.

BASIC CLASSES:
Basic classes are classes that any characters can change into at any time,
no matter what stats they may have. You probably don't want to stay
with the Apprentice class, so your character will most likely choose one
of these class in the beginning. From the melee-oriented Warrior to the
magically schooled Mage, it's up to you to pick the class that best suits
your playing style.

ADVANCED CLASSES:
While it is possible to try finishing the game with only a basic class,
there are advanced classes available to the experienced adventurer. These
classes cannot be changed into at anytime, they have requirements that
must be met. However, they are more powerful than the regular basic
classes.

Each class has 10 levels, each associated with a rank. To gain levels in
a class, you must kill enemies that are at least the same level as yours.
So, if you have an experience level of 24 and kills a level 23 enemy, it
won't count toward the class level. Below is the number of enemies needed
to gain class levels:

Level 1: None
Level 2: 15 kills
Level 3: 30 kills
Level 4: 60 kills
Level 5: 100 kills
Level 6: 150 kills
Level 7: 200 kills
Level 8: 300 kills
Level 9: 400 kills
Level 10: 500 kills

So, in order to master a class, you must kill 500 enemies that are at
least your equal in levels.

Each class also have 10 different abilities they can learn. To get access
to the abilities menu, press 'J'. You will see a menu with each of the
10 abilities available to this class. Every time you gain an experience
level, you gain an ability point(you also start the game with one). You
use your ability points to learn new abilities. To learn an ability,
enter it's corresponding number. Of course, you cannot learn all abilities
of a class at the start. The six first abilities can be learned at any
time. The abilities 7, 8 and 9 can only be learned if you are at class
level 6 or higher. And to learn the last ability, you must have a class
level of 10.

Once you learn an ability, it will become hilighted and a number appear
right to it. Once an ability is learned, it will always be active, even
after you change to another class. So if you learn the Magic Missile
mage ability, you will be able to use it as a Warrior. So you can easily
cross the abilities of the various classes!

Once you learn an ability, you will be able to spend ability points to
enhance it instead of learning a new one. It is highly recommended to
focus in a few abilities rather than trying to learn as many as possible.
Find a few abilites you like, then place your points in these abilities.
It will be more effective than learning too many abilities. At any times,
you cannot learn more than 20 different abilities, so you will HAVE to
place more than one point in some abilities. How you build your character
is entirely up to you. There are MILLIONS of possibilities!

To know more about what each classes does, consult the Classes Guide. To
learn more about their abilities, consult the Abilities Guide.

HIT RATE SYSTEM
-----------------

In newAngband 1.5.0(and higher), the way the success of your blows is 
calculated has completely changed into a new, simpler and more 
effective system. Every monsters now have a defense and hit rate, 
which increase with their level. While these are invisible to you, 
you can know them by casting the spell "Scan Monster". The higher the
enemy's level, the more hit rate and defense it has.

HITTING A MONSTER

When you hit a monster, it's your own hit rate VS the monster's defense.
Your hit rate is equal to your level + your to_hit, so if you have a +36
bonus to hit, and you are level 20, your hit rate is 56. When you hit
a monster, a random number between 1 and your hit rate is rolled, and a
number between 1 and the monster's defense is rolled. If your number is
higher or equal to the monster's number, you hit the monster. Otherwise,
you miss it. For ranged attacks, it's the same thing, except you will
have a penality for shooting too far away from the monster. To help you
hit more often, try finding a lot of items with +to_hit. Also note that 
if your hit rate is 0 or less, you will NEVER hit an enemy.

A MONSTER TRIES TO HIT YOU

It's basically the same thing as when you hit the monster, it's the
monster's hit rate VS your defense. Your defense is equal to your AC.
It works exactly the same way as when you hit the monster, so repeating
how it's done is useless! ;)

MONSTER VS MONSTER

Same thing again. Attacking monster's hit rate VS defending monster's
defense.

As you can see, the new system is much simpler, and makes to_hit MUCH
MUCH MUCH more important! So before throwing away that (+30,+1) sword
because you found a (+1,+30) and think it is better, think again! A
+30 will make it MUCH easier for you to hit!

MAGIC ITEMS
-------------

NewAngband is the first variant to have introduced a random ego-item
system. Items no longer have a special name(such as a "Sword of Slay Troll"),
but instead have a colored name. The higher your level, the more abilities
the items will have, and the more powerful they will be. Here's a description
of each of the different kinds of items:

Magic: Magic items have randomly chosen abilities, as well as to_hit and
to_dam bonuses. The higher your level, the more powerful the magic items
will be, and they will have more abilities. Magic items are fairly common,
and you will surely find a lot of them during your quest. Magic items can
be recognised by their purple name.

Tweakable: Tweakable items are similar to magic items. However, you can tweak
them during the game, meaning that you can choose new abilities for them. To
tweak an item, use the 'N' command(you can also use this command to give
a name to any item of your choice). Tweakable items are very powerful,
but they are rarer than magic items. Tweaking them also cost money.
Tweakable items are recognised by their blue name.

Artifacts: Rare, unique, magical items. They are not randomly
generated. They have a yellow name. They vary greatly in strength and power.
Usually, they have "unusual" values for their base item types, such as a
10d10 Katana. While many special items beat artifacts, the most powerful
weapons in the game are extremely rare artifacts.

Special: The most powerful items. Randomly generated like magic items, they are
extremely powerful, with a high level of power, very high to_hit and to_dam
bonuses, and more abilities. They are also tweakable, and can gain some abilities
that normal magic items would normally not gain. Special items are very rare,
and can't even be found until you are at least level 20.

MONSTERS LEVEL
----------------

Another new thing in NewAngband: the monsters level. Each monsters have a level.
Every monsters defined in r_info are level 1 monsters. The higher their levels,
the more damages they do, and the amount of damages dealt increase rather
quickly, making the game quite hard. Also, as the monsters get higher level,
they will take less damages from all your physical attacks. They gain 1% resistance 
per levels, up to a maximum resistance of 70%.

The way the damages increase is the following:
Let's take a Small Kobold. The base damages are 1d5 for a level 1 kobold, as
defined in the r_info file. Both the dice number and the dice side will
increase by (Monster Level / 2). So a level 2 Small kobold will do 2d6 damages.
A level 4 Small Kobold will do 3d7 damages. A level 12 one will do 7d11.

As for the Hp, the base hp, defined in r_info, is multiplied by the Monster's Level.
So a level 6 Small Kobold would have (2d7 x 6) hp. A level 9 one would have (2d7 x 9)
and so on... High level monsters will also get an extra bonus to hp, so very
high level monsters will have tons of hp.


ELITES AND BOSSES
-------------------

Elites and Bosses are stronger version of normal monsters. In addition to having
much more hp and being at a higher level, they have a special ability. Here are
the abilities they can gain:

- Immunity to weapons and physical attacks.
- Immunity to magical attacks.
- 50% resistance to all attacks, cumulative with the level resistance.
- Cursing hits(a blow Blind, Scare and Confuse you)
- Do double damages with physical attacks.
- Do double damages with magical attacks.
- Return 50% of the physical damages you do to yourself.
- Return 50% of the magical damages you do to yourself.

Elites basically have more hp, hite rate and defense and one randomly chosen 
ability. Bosses have even more hp, defense and hit rate, and they can have more 
than one ability, depending on how deep you are in the dungeon. Also, you cannot 
know the exact amount of hp a boss has, which can be very annoying.

But Elites are worth more experience than normal monsters, and always drop a
magic item. Bosses are worth much more experience than elites, and will drop
more magic items.

THE *COMPLETELY NEW* MAGIC SYSTEM OF 1.7.0(and higher!)!
---------------------------------------------

An entirely new spell system has been done for NewAngband 1.7.0! Now, instead
of having a menu with premade spells, you have magical effects, and you
make your own spells out of these effects! To enter the casting mode,
you use the usual 'm' command. Now, you will be asked if you with to cast
a spell, create a spell or delete a spell you made. You start the game with
no spells and no effects, so you must first find a book and learn it's
effect. There are five schools of magic, and each have their own effects.
Once you find a book of magic(you can buy some in the shops at the start),
use the 'G' command to gain it's effect. Once a spell effect is learned,
you can enter the spell creation mode!

When creating a spell, you will be asked to choose a slot for your spell.
You can only have up to 12 spells, so you will have to manage them! Pick
an empty slot(or an occupied one, in which case the spell will be deleted).
Now, you will be asked to choose a school, then pick an
effect from it. Pick one of your learned effects. You will now be able to
customize your spell by adding more power, radius, etc... Of course, the
more powerful your spell is, the more mana it will cost to cast! Once done,
you will be able to either finish the creation, or add another effect to
the spell. A spell can have a total of five effects, but keep in mind that
adding multiple effects will greatly increase the cost of your spells!

Once the spell is done, you will enter a name for it. Enter a name, and
presto! A new spell is created! Now, you may cast it whenever you want.
Keep in mind that you can only create spells in the town, so be wise when
creating spells. To learn more about the various effects, consult the
spells guide. Also, if you enjoy casting spells, take a look at some of
the mage and high mage abilities. Some of them can be really helpful!

Introduced in NewAngband 1.7.2 is a new feature allowing you to cast
a spell using the 'p' command(as in 'prayer'). This allow you to use 
Wisdom to cast a spell instead of mana. When using Wisdom, your spell
will not cost mana to cast, but success is not guaranteed. And if your
wisdom is too low and the spell's cost is too high, and you fail casting
it, there will be consequences! Refer to the formula guide to find
out how the success rate is calculated.

RECRUITING AND BEFRIENDING MONSTERS
-------------------------------------

This feature has been introduced in NewAngband 1.4.0. It basically allow
any characters to recruit monsters in their team. To do this, use the
special "Hire/Befriend" command from the special abilities menu(by pressing
'U'). Then, you can "speak" to a monster next to you. If your charisma is
high enough, the monster will ask for a price, and if you pay it, it will
help you during the whole level. But beware, if you anger them, they will
turn against you(and won't give your money back!).

If you have a very high charisma, the monster will accept to become your
friend for free, and will stay with you forever, until they die. You can
also control these friends.

Finally, note that recruiting and befriending do not always works, especially
if you try to do that on a very high level monster. You need a very high
charisma to fully benefit from this feature!

MONSTER GENERATOR
-------------------

Introduced in NewAngband 1.5.0(and higher), this new monster generator 
allow you to instantly create tons of new monsters to fight during the 
game! The good thing about this is that if you feel like you have seen 
the monsters too often, or you simply want more monsters, well, you can 
have over a thousand of new monsters!

To use the generator:

1. Go to your NewAngband directory, and enter the lib/edit directory.
2. Copy the r_info.txt file to the main NewAngband directory(the one
where angband.exe is!).
3. Make a backup copy of the original r_info.txt!
4. Run NewAngband, and during the game, press 'W'. A prompt will be
displayed.
5. Press 'g' to generate the monsters.
6. Quit the game, and replace the old r_info by the new one with the
new monsters.
7. Restart the game, and have fun with the monsters! :)

Now, it's not a 'smart' generator. The monsters generated by it are 
completly random, and you cannot predict what kind of monsters you 
will get. Some of them will be *WEIRD*. Some of them might also be 
quite strong and challenging. No uniques monsters will be generated 
by the generator. And currently, you cannot play the random monsters 
with the Monster race. Note that in fact, the generator DOES have 
some sparks of intelligence. A troll will get the TROLL flag, meaning 
it is vulnerable to troll slaying weapons. A dragon is a real dragon, 
but a Yellow Dragon might appear as a red symbol on your screen.

The generator will generate 1270 monsters, so basically, you will get
around 10 monsters for every 127 levels of the dungeon. In future
versions, the generator will be updated, so you can generate as many
monsters as you want.

Only generate the monsters ONCE per r_info files. If you generate
monsters in a file which already has random monsters, it will not
work properly. So if you do not like the new random monsters, simply
use the old r_info, and use the generator again to generate new
monsters. That is why the backup copy is important!

Finally, have fun with this generator! :) Note that this feature is
fully optionnal, but it can add a very nice amount of challenge, as
you will never know what to expect from monsters!

ODDS AND ENDS
---------------

- Most abilities can be used with the 'U' command. Others, such as
spells and special monster powers, are used with 'm'.
- The 'N' command can be used to tweak tweakable items, as well as to give
a name to any of your items.
- Use the 'J' command to gain abilities.
- Try to have a good Class/Abilities combo.
- Scrolls of teleportations and potions of cure serious/critical wounds
are very useful! You should always carry a few on you.
- Combat Feats skill is extremely useful to melee characters! A special
ability is stronger than a normal hit, so if you can do like 20
Spin Attacks in a single turn, you will do A LOT of damages!

And of course, good luck and happy gaming! :)


If you have any questions, comments or suggestions, you can:
Write on the NewAngband board: http://variaz.proboards3.com
Or, mail me to: variaz@hotmail.com
