=== Other Attributes ===

This file discusses the attributes shown on the left side of the main window
and the various special immunities and qualities that characters may acquire in
their adventures.  It also tells you how to keep track of all this information.


=== Character Attributes Shown on the Left Side of the Main Window ===
     
Level:        Your character's level.  It reflects how powerful you are; level
              1 is a beginning character, while level 50 is the maximum you can
              reach.
Gold:         Your current gold supply. Gold is amazingly handy, because
              everything the town can sell can be yours with enough of the
              stuff.  
Vital Statistics (STR, MEM, WIS, DEX, CON and PRE):
              Your character has six primary statistics, or stats. The lowest 
              any stat can go is 0, a level which greatly reduces any abilities
              that stat influences. The highest a stat can rise without 
              equipment or race bonuses is 20. More information on individual 
              stats is available in the help file stats.txt.
Armor:         Armor class helps prevent you getting killed.  It may be 
              increased by equipping more and better armor, and by increasing 
              your Dexterity.
Hits:         Each character has hit points, representing how much damage he 
              can sustain before he suffers a permanent wound or, if he already
              has the same wound, dies. The maximum number of hit points is
              derived from race, class, level, and constitution. Hit points may
              be regained by resting, or by a variety of magical means. Once
              your character suffers a permanent wound, adrenalin surge heals
              him to 50 % of maximum hitpoints and cures all poison, cuts,
              stunning, confusion, blindness, and slowing. 
Mana:         Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how 
              many spells a character can cast (or tunes he can play). Mana may
              be regained by resting or some rare magical means.
Lore:         You may use Lore points to use many proficiencies. They refresh
              every time you take the stairs down. Read the help file prof.txt
              for detailed information on proficiencies.
Reserves:     You may use Reserves to use the proficiency Recover. Recover
              restores hitpoints and cures many status effects. Reserves points
              refresh every time you take the stairs down.
Escapes:      You may spend Escapes to use the proficiency Escape, which is
              directed teleportation. Escapes points refresh every time you
              take the stairs down.


=== Other abilities ===

Infra-vision: Infra-vision is the ability to see heat sources.  It will allow 
              a character to see any warm-blooded creature up to a certain 
              distance. This ability works equally well with or without a light
              source.  Several of the playable races have innate infravision.

Wounds:       Your character may have three kinds of wounds. Each wound hurts
              two of your stats either temporarily or permanently.

                 VIGOR (STR & CON)
                 WIT (MEM & WIS)
                 GRACE (DEX & PRE)

	      Whenever your hit points go to negative, you heal to half your
	      maximum hitpoints, cure most negative effects, and get a random
              wound. If you ever get the same wound again, you die.

              The ability damage from a wound depends on the dungeon level:
              - In town, you just get a scar. No ability damage.
              - Starting from DL 1, you get some temporary ability damage to
                one of the stats.
              - Starting from DL 12 you get some temporary ability damage to
                both stats.
              - Starting from DL 24 you get a point of permanent damage to one
                of the stats, and some temporary damage to both stats.
              - Starting from DL 36 you get a point of permanent damage and
                some temporary damage to both stats.

              The permanent damage from wounds is truly permanent. It's reduced
              from your racial bonus.

              Sustained stats are protected from wound damage, both temporary
              and permanent.

	      There are now a couple of ways to cure a Wound: drinking from
	      a Fountain of Cure Wound or performing the Ritual of Cure Wound.
              The ritual may sometimes cure more than one wound. If a Wound is
              cured, all the permanent ability damage from that wound is also
              healed.
