The Great Outdoors
=== ===== ========

Cthangband has a collection of towns, towers, and dungeons set in a
wilderness map, which must be traversed to get from one to another.
Each dungeon and tower has at least one guardian, and the sewers of
several towns also have guardians.  In order to win the game, all
guardians must be defeated.

Shops
=====

Shops are found in towns.  Most of them have a variety of items to sell,
already fully identified and ready to examine, and will buy such items
from players (although they insist on making a profit).  Shopkeepers are
of various races, and have various levels of racial tolerance and greed.
All shopkeepers have a maximum amount they will pay for any one item sold
by the player.  Shopkeepers are sometimes replaced by other shopkeepers,
especially if somebody buys out all of their stock.

Most shops have other functions as well.

General Store (1): Buys and sells food, cloaks, light sources, ammunition, 
and other minor items.

Armoury (2): Buys and sells all sorts of armor and shields.  Will enchant
armor for a price.

Weapon Smiths (3): Buys and sells all sorts of weapons and ammunition.
Will enchant a weapon for a price.

Temple (4):  Buys and sells blunt weapons, potions, scrolls, and sometimes
prayer books.  Will initiate a player with a spirit, or restore that
player's skills, for a price.

Alchemy Shop (5):  Buys and sells potions and scrolls.  Will identify all
inventory items for a price.

Magic Shop (6):  Buys and sells charms, wands, staves, amulets, and will
buy potions and scrolls.  Will cast the ritual of Recall for a very high
price.  This ritual will bring you back to the town at the moment of
death, completely healed, without your items and with very little money.

Black Market (7):  Buys most things at low prices, sells most things at
high.  They can get things that the other shops can't, and they charge
for them.

Home (8):  A house a player may buy to rest at, and store things in.

Bookstore (9):  Buys and sells all sorts of magical books.  All bookstores
have quiet study rooms to learn hermetic spells in.

Inn (white '+'):  Has food available, and rooms to rent for the night
(or for the day, for nocturnal folk).

Pawnbrokers (green '+'): Will purchase items.

Town Hall (yellow '+'):  Will show records of other players, and will sell
you a house if one is available in town.


Towns
=====

Towns have dungeon areas known as sewers, and most have some sort of
shop.  Some of them are unusually well-populated with one sort of
creature or another, and some of them have guardians at the bottom
of their sewers, which must be defeated.

Different towns have different collections of shops, and different
depths to their sewers.

The Beautiful City of Celephais:  Lacks a black market, but has all
other shops, including two temples.  The sewers go down to 150'.

The Picturesque Town of Ulthar:  Also lacks a black market.  The
sewers go down to 350', and have the Champion of Cats as a guardian.

The Unwholesome City of Dyath-Leen:  Has no Temple, Alchemy Shop, or
Magic Shop, but three black markets make it a great place to shop for
players with lots of money.  The sewers go down to 450', and are populated
as if they were 50' deeper than they are.

Kadath, Home of the Gods:  Well, the relatively mild gods of Earth, but
they usually flee the approach of sufficiently strong mortals and call
for the Outer Gods to protect them.  Kadath is actually a mountain, and
has no shops.  It is crawling with Cthulhoid entities.  The dungeon
goes down to 3750', act as if they were 2500' deeper, and are guarded
by Nyarlathotep and Azathoth.  Wise adventurers avoid Kadath until they
are tremendously strong.

The Market Town of Hlanth:  Lacks a temple and pawnbrokers.  The sewers
go to 250'.

The City of Ilek-Vad:  Lacks a pawnbroker.  The sewers also go to 250'.

The Industrious Town of Inganok:  Lacks a magic shop, or a house for sale.
The sewers go to 250'.

The Hamlet of Nir:  Not much here, but it has a general store and an inn.
There are a lot of assorted people walking through town.  The sewers go
to 350', and are guarded by Robin Hood.

Dungeons and Towers
======== === ======

These are in the wilderness, and are reached by walking from the towns.
Dungeons can be full-sized, and down staircases go away from the surface
and towards more dangerous levels.  Towers always have small levels, and
up staircases go away from the surface and towards more dangerous levels.
As a visual cue, the depth/height indicator in dungeons and sewers is in
parentheses (e.g., "(50 ft.)"), whereas it is different in towers
(e.g., "/50 ft.\").  All dungeons and towers have guardians.

The Yeek King's Lair:  Goes to 400', but counts as 100' deeper.  It is
guarded by Orfax and Boldor.  The surrounding area will be populated with
yeeks.

The Orc Tower:  Goes to 850', but counts as 150' deeper.  It is guarded
by Bolg and Azog.  The surrounding area will be populated by orcs.

Khufu's Tomb:  Goes to 1050', and counts as 200' deeper.  It is guarded by
the Disembodied Hand and by Khufu, and the area outside is populated by
undead.

The Collector's Cave:  Goes to 1000', and counts as 2000' deeper.  It is
guarded by the Collector, and there is no particular sort of creature
that will be found in its vicinity.

The Vault of the Sword:  Goes to 1500', and counts as 500' deeper.  It is
guarded by Stormbringer.

The Dragons' Lair:  Goes to 1750', and counts as 250' deeper.  It is guarded
by Glaurung and Ancalagon the Black, and the area outside swarms with
dragons.

The Necropolis:  A tower that goes to 2000', and counts as 1500' deeper.
(This is sufficiently high to practice all skills to 100%).  It is
guarded by the Fire Phantom and Vecna, and the area outside is populated
by greater undead.

The Demon Spire:  Goes to 1000', and counts as 750' higher.  It is
guarded by the Emissary and Glaryssa, and the area outside is populated
by demons.

The Conflux of the Elements:  A tower that goes to 1000', and counts as
1000' higher.  It is guarded by Lasha and Grom, and the area outside
has large numbers of elemental beings.

Shelob's Tower:  A tower that goes to 850', and counts as 650' more.
It is guarded by Shelob, and is surrounded by nests of spiders.

The Kobold Fort:  A tower that goes to 250', and counts as 50' more.
It is guarded by Vort, the Kobold Queen, and there are plenty of
kobolds in the vicinity.

The Tower of Koth:  A tower that goes to 1000', and counts as 2000'
higher.  It is guarded by Father Dagon and by Tulzscha, and there are
cthulhoid beings about it.

