
--- The title screen ---

     When you start up the game, a title screen appears, bearing the game logo,
a dragon image, and some credits.  Also on this screen are the three most
important Sangband resources:
     The Sangband home page at "http://www.runegold.org/sangband/" contains the
current source and executables, special files, helpful comments, hints, and
links, and the latest Sangband news.
     Sangband changes maintainers every so often.  The current one is Leon
Marrick.  If you want to send him comments, or make sure your bug report gets
heard, use the email shown on the website.
     The Angband Forum is at "http://angband.oook.cz/forum/"; it's filled with
helpful folks.  If you want to talk about Sangband or ask for help, there's the
place to go.


--- The main screen ---

     Once you clear the character display, you find yourself looking at the main
screen.  This is divided into four parts:

1)   The message line is located at the top of the screen; here all sorts of
messages are shown.  If in the heat of combat you skip past one too many, you
can display it again by pressing control-P.
2)   The left side of the screen is used to display important information.
3)   Most of the screen displays your surroundings.  You can take a closer look
by pressing 'l'ook (or e'x'amine).
4)   The bottom line of the main screen shows various status displays, such as
your speed, ailments, depth, and so on.

     You play the game in the main screen.  For more details on the things you
can do, consult the section on commands.


--- The character screen  ('C') ---

     The character information display you see when first starting the game can
be recalled by typing 'C'.  Here you can review your attributes, change names,
and save character dumps to file (which appear in the "lib/user" directory).


--- The skills screen  ('$') ---

     When you collect enough experience, you can spend it on skills by typing
'$' to open up the skills advancement screen.


--- The help screen  ('?') ---

     The online help system is available by typing '?'.  You can also learn more
about the symbols you see on screen by typing '/', then the symbol you wish to
learn more about.


--- The options screen  ('=') ---

     You can adjust the way the game looks and behaves by typing '=' to enter
the options screen.


--- The knowledge screen  ('~') ---

     Detailed listings of known artifacts, objects, and monsters are available
through the knowledge menu, which you access by typing '~'.  Here you can also
review the high score listings, what you have stashed in your home, and see how
many monsters you've killed and what quests you are assigned.


--- The death interface ---

     If you should die, you will see a tombstone and be able to check out your
slain character one last time.  Here you can:
- display the character screen and see your possessions,
- review the final messages,
- save information in a character dump,
- see the high score table, and
- fully identify individual items.















