Ponyband version 0.3.0

My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic debued on television on October 10th, 2010.
While previous generations of show did have fans, the shows were largely 
viewed as being extremely "girly" and low on substance, so little was expected
of this new iteration. This version, however, managed to defy that trend. With 
a mind to prove that girls' cartoons done have to be "a puddle of smooshy, 
cutesy-wootsy, goody-two-shoeness," creator Lauren Faust developed a world with 
a relatable cast, strong lessons, and fun sense of humor that captivated the 
minds of children and adults alike, and the shows popularity spread through
the internet like wild fire, quickly appearing on all manner of sites.

Naturally, Angband gets its dose of friendship and magic too.

Ponyband is based on First Age Angband (FAangband) 1.2.6 by Nick McConnell.
The primary changes have been those of setting, replacing items and characters
from Middle Earth with those from Equestria, and changing the story from the
fight against Morgoth in the Silmarilian to the fight against Nightmare Moon
in Elements of Harmony. While the setting isn't entirely consistant, with some
items and characters appearing from later in the series, or occationally other
generations of My Little Pony, some fan content, or even a little bit outside
of My Little Pony entirely, the core setting of Friendship is Magic is 
preserved as much as possible.

There are a number of core changes which should be noted going in to the game,
as some things differ significantly from FAangband

 - In keeping with the different setting, the races have changed significantly.
   Most noticably, several of the races are not humanoid.  There races lack 
   hands and fingers, and the game recognizes limitations from this. Since they
   don't have hands, they cannot hold some equipment normally, instead holding
   weapons in their mouths and strapping shields to their forleg.  While this
   is largely just cosmetic, they can't use these in conjunction to duel wield,
   so they can only use weapons that can be used in a single hand.
   Additionally, they lack fingers, so they are unable to wear rings.  Some
   races have horns which they can wear rings on, but since they use their 
   horns to cast magic, wearing a ring on one limits their spell casting just
   like a human wearing gloves.  A plan is currently in the works to allow the
   player to select a Cutie Mark for the races that have one, giving a minor
   customizable bonus for those races.  Their design has taken this into 
   account, so until that is implemented, they may appear slightly weaker than
   intended.
   
 - The FAangband wilderness has been removed.  Since the entire quest takes 
   place within the Castle of the Royal Pony Sisters, there isn't any need
   for a wilderness anyway.
   
 - Monster have learned some new tricks.  Don't be surprised to encounter 
   enemies that explode when they attack, drain your mana, create weak
   clones to fight you.  Additionally, some enemies won't appear normally and
   only arrive when summoned by another monster, allowing summoners to have 
   some unexpected surprises for you. Also, be aware that some especially nasty
   foes have found a way to become immune to teleportation.
   
Special thanks to everyone who helped me with my crazy compiler issues on 
andband.oook.cz and to Nick McConnell for creating a great variant to work
from with some extremely clean and organized code.