
=== Differences of PosBand from other variants ===

PosBand is based on NPPAngband 0.3.4 source code, which, in turn, is based
on Angband 3.0.5.  Generally PosBand is similar to NPPAngband (rather than,
for example, ZAngband, OAngband or ToME).  In this file, I will enumerate some
of the important differences with NPPAngband and with other variants where
similar features were implemented.

PosBand is compared here to:

 * ToME 2.3.1
 * OAngband
 * ZAngband
 * Hengband 1.6.0


=== Pets ===

Pets are friendly monsters, which can be either summoned or charmed by player.
Pets will help player in combat.  They retain their AI, but can be roughly
commanded.  Pets are normally lost as soon as the player leaves the current
level.  Permanent pets are called companions.  There is a limit on the total
number of companions.  Pet/companion terminology is universally accepted in
Angband community, though it could be misleading; any kind of monsters can
become a pet, including humanoids.

I consider pets/companions an important part of PosBand gameplay.  Pets are
implemented in a number of variants (ZAngband, Hengband, ToME and others), but
they are generally seldom used.  I attempted to fix the important shortcomings
in PosBand, and I believe PosBand has currently the most playable pet
implementation.


--> Acquiring pets

Pets can be summoned in the following ways:

 * Reading a Scroll of Summon Pet.  This is a common item, sold in the Temple.
 * Using a Staff of Summon Pet.  These are found randomly.
   Both these methods will summon 1-3 random pets from the current dungeon
   level.
 * Aiming a Wand of Charming at the monster.  These are found randomly.
   Monster has a saving throw against charming.
 * Using similar race-specific powers.  Typically, only the pets of a specific
   type can be summoned in this way.

Less common ways include activating Quylthulg race artifact, using shrieking
power etc.

In other variants, pets are usually obtained with class-specific spells or
powers.  ToME, in particular, allows players with "Summoning" skill to extract
totems from the corpses of dead monsters and use them to summon pets of that
type.


--> Experience from pets

You get 1/10 experience from creatures killed by pet.  This is different from
ZAngband-based variants, where you do not get any experience at all from pet
kills.  In ToME, the amount of experience you get depends on your "Monster
lore" skill.

Quylthulg race is a special case.  See "Quylthulg" section.


--> Quylthulg

PosBand allows you to play Quylthulg race.  As far as I know, no other Angband
variant has similar feature.  Quylthulgs are unique, as about the only thing
they can do is summoning pets.  They are unable to use any melee or missile
weapons, and do not have any offensive magic.  They have poor stats (except
charisma) and speed, and few usable equipment slots.  Pets are the _only_ way
to survive and to win for them.

As such, pet restrictions are relaxed for Quylthulgs:

 * Player gets 1/2 experience from pet kills (normally 1/10)
 * Pets can kill uniques, including questors (Sauron and Morgoth)

To be able to control their pets better, Quylthulgs have innate telepathy
ability.  Free phase door and cheap teleportation is available for quick
escape.

Despite the very different and unusual playstyle, Quylthulgs were found
actually playable and even interesting.  No wins are known yet, so that's
your chance! :-)
