QUESTS:
(This file was last edited for NPPAngband 0.5.3)

There are many different styles of quests in NPPAngband. Each game has two 
permanent quests and nine types of optional quests.

PERMANENT QUESTS:

NPPAngband has always had two permanent fixed quests:

Kill Sauron at 4950 feet.
Kill Morgoth at 5000 feet.

When one of these quests is completed, a staircase appears to allow a player to
go deeper in the dungeon. A player must kill Sauron at 4950 feet in order to be
able to meet Morgoth. Defeating Morgoth, or completing both permanent quests, 
wins the game.


Additional fixed quests could be added by altering the quests.txt and 
limits.txt files.  This would break savefile compatibility, and would need 
to be done before starting a new game. 
(Note: Do not attempt this unless you know *exactly* what you are doing.)

OPTIONAL QUESTS:

NPPAngband has a town building called the Adventurer's Guild.
A player may choose to visit this building and receive a quest from the
Guild. Initially, a player can choose only monster quest.  The guild will 
never assign more than one optional quest at any time. Upon completion of an 
optional quest, the guild gives a reward to the player.  After the player has 
completed a quest, they should return to the adventurer's guild, and select
a quest reward.  The quality and quantity of rewards offered varies each quest,
but as a rule of thumb the quest rewards with hihger fame increases offer
better rewards, both in the quality and quantity of reward choices.

The player can also choose to defer their quest rewards, which will offer a 
moderate increase to the quest rewards after the next completed quest.  The 
deferred reward bonus is cumulative, in that it gets greater if the player
defers several rewards in a row.  However if the player fails a quest, 
the potential deferred rewards counter is reset, along with the reduction
in player fame.

At any given time, the status of the player's optional quest can be viewed by
pressing <CTRL-Q>.

The Adventurer's Guild (building # 9 in the town) chooses what kind of quest the
adventurer is given. The guild will vary the selection of quests offered each time,
but there are nine different types of quests offered.


***** <Monster or Unique Quest>
MONSTER QUESTS:
This is the most common quest. The player is assigned to go to a specified
depth, based on the average difficulty of monsters 0-5 levels below the quest 
level, and kill a certain number of monsters. The number of monsters to 
kill varies each quest.

Unlike fixed quests, it is not mandatory to complete the quest in order to win
the game.  A player can choose to dive right past the designated quest level, 
or leave and return to a quest level. Leaving an optional quest level without
killing the required number of creatures can result in a failed quest.  
Completing a monster quest increased player fame by 10.  Failing a monster 
quest reduces total player fame by 55%.  

***** <Guardian Quest>
FIXED MONSTER QUESTS:
Similar to monster quests.  The player is tasked to go to a specified
depth, based on the average difficulty of monsters 4-9 levels below the quest 
level, and kill a certain number of monsters (usually around 15 creatures), or
a single unique. The depth of the quest and number of monsters varies.

Unlike fixed quests, it is not mandatory to complete the quest in order to win
the game.  Unlike a monster quest, a player cannot dive past the designated quest
level until they complete the quest.  Also unlike a regular monster quest, you 
may leave and return to the level without killing the required number of 
creatures, without failing your quest.  The only ways to fail this quest are to 
die trying and to request to abandon the quest at the adventurer's guild.  A
down staircase will appear when you complete this quest.  Completing a guardian 
quest increases player fame by 15.  Failing a monster quest reduces total player 
fame by 55%.  

***** <Pit or Nest Quest>
PIT, or NEST QUESTS:
This quest is to go to a specified depth and kill or destroy every creature
in a monster pit or nest.  A monster pit/nest has 95 creatures of a given theme.
Since there are so many like creatures bunched so closely together, a creature
from inside one of these special pits/nests will not attempt to summon more 
creatures to the battle.  This type of quest tends to be more difficult 
than a monster or unique quest.  Voluntarily leaving a Pit/Nest quest 
level before all 95 creatures are killed results in immediate quest failure.
Completing a Pit or Next quest increases player fame by 10 + 10d2.  
Failing a monster quest reduces total player fame by 35%.  In addition to the 
guild quest reward, 5 monsters in the pit/next are holding an aditional good item.

***** <Level Quest>
THEMED LEVEL QUESTS:
This quest is a more difficult version of the Monster Pit/Nest quests.  Instead 
of 95 creatures in a pit or nest, the entire level is full of 200 or more
monsters of a particular theme.  Since there are so many like creatures bunched 
so closely together, a creature from inside one of these themed levels only summon
other creatures already on the level in battle.  Voluntarily leaving a themed 
level results in immediate quest failure. Completing a Themed Level Quest 
increases player fame by 15 + 10d2.  Failing a themed level quest reduces total 
player fame by 35%.  In addition to the guild quest reward, many of the monsters
on the level are holding an aditional good item.

***** <Wilderness Quest>
WILDERNESS QUEST:
This quest is a collection quest type.  The player is tasked to go to a wilderness
level that is gradually being overrun by lava or boiling mud.  The player needs
to collect and return to the guild 20 pieces of faded scroll fragments.  The 
quest level starts with 10 scroll fragments on the ground, and 20 held by monsters.
Since there are so many like creatures bunched so closely together, 
a creature from inside one of these themed levels only summon other creatures 
already on the level in battle. Time is of the essense in this quest type, as 
the scroll fragments can be destroyed by fire, acid, or when the ground it is 
laying on gets overrun by lava or boiling mud.  In addition, the monsters will 
move to avoid the spreading lava or boiling mud, so they will close in on 
the player quicker than a typical level.  Voluntarily leaving a wilderness 
level results in immediate quest failure.  Completing a Wilderness Level Quest 
increases player fame by 20 + 10d2.  Failing a wilderness quest reduces total 
player fame by 30%.  In addition to the guild quest reward, all wilderness levels 
contain between 3-6 chests on the ground.

***** <Labyrinth Quest>
LABYRINTH QUEST:
This quest has a small labrynth level.  4 Monsters or monster groups 
will appear every 20 game turns, one of which has been chosen at random 
to hold a small scroll fragment, which they will drop when you kill them.  
Your goal is to collect 10 of them and return them to the guild.  The difficulty
of the quest deepends on the difficulty of the creatures on the level.
Voluntarily leaving a Labrynth quest level results in immediate quest failure.  
Completing a Labrynth Level Quest increases player fame by 25 + 10d2.  
Failing a labrynth quest reduces total player fame by 30%.  Helpful objects
will appear on the dungeon floor as well, if the player can get to them.


***** <Vault Quest>
VAULT, or ARTIFACT QUESTS:
This quest is to go to a specified depth, retrieve an artifact and return 
it to the guild, which is being held by a monster inside a small vault on a 
small level. The artifact is special in that it cannot be weilded by the player. 
Returning the artifact to the adventurer's guild completes the quest. 
The difficulty of an artifact quest is dependent on 
the monsters guarding the artifact.  You will most likely need some form 
of tunneling, such as a digging tool or a magic source of stone-to-mud, 
to gain access to the vault.   Voluntarily leaving a level without the quest
artifact results in immediate quest failure.  Completing an Artifact Quest 
increases player fame by 50.  Failing an artifact quest reduces total 
player fame by 50%.


***** <Arena Quest>
ARENA QUEST:
The player starts in a small, empty room.  The quest is to kill 40 random 
creatures that appear in the room.  (Note that a group of monsters only
counts as one).  The room will slowly expand, revealing items that will
help the player survive.  This is one of the hardest quests, as the player
will not be able to rest much while while wave after wave of monsters 
appear.  Voluntarily leaving an arena level results in immediate quest failure.
Completing an Arena Quest increases player fame by 40 + 10d2.  Failing an 
artifact quest reduces total player fame by 20%.

***** <Greater Vault Quest>
GREATER VAULT QUEST:
The quest is the reward!  The player will arrive on a small dungeon level 
that consists of a single greater vault.  The goal is to enter the greater 
vault and survive on the level, and kill as many creatures as possible 
while a time counter counts down.  A timer is displayed showing how many 
player turns (at the current player speed) the player has remaining.  The 
player gains more time as they kill more vault creatures.  Once the timer 
expires, all monsters disappear, including all objects they are holding,  
leaving the player to collect any loot remaining on the ground before they leave. 
Remember in NPPAngband all vault objects are held by monsters instead of being 
on the floor.  This reward for this quest lies in the objects collected 
from the greater vault. The guild will offer only a moderate amount of gold 
as a quest reward. Voluntarily leaving the quest level before the timer 
expires, or allowing the quest time to expire without entering the greater 
vault, results in immediate quest failure. Completing a Artifact Quest 
increases player fame by 10.  Failing an artifact quest reduces total 
player fame by only 10%.


REWARDS:

The biggest reason to take on an optional quest is the reward.  The quality 
of the rewards offered depends on two factors. The first factor is the difficulty
of the quest.  The second factor is the player's reputation at the guild. 
The player's reputation at the guild is increased by completing quests 
and by killing uniques and player ghosts. When the advanturer fails a quest, their 
reputation at the guild is greatly decreased.

Early in the game, the rewards are usually a choice of gold or objects.  As a 
player's reputation increases, the guild will offer to reward the player with 
permanent stat increases, dungeon spellbooks, or permanent hp increases.  
The ultimate reward is for the guild to offer to create an artifact 
specifically as a quest reward.  The player will even be given a chance to 
choose the object to be made into an artifact and name it.