
====== Races ======

     There are eight different races that you may choose among.
Races differ in vital statistics, and tend to be better at some abilities than
at others.

     In Ironband, you gain stat points when you go down levels. You'll find 
that these stat points will tend to go on the stats most suited to your race
(especially below DL 7).

Human:
     A flexible and adaptive race, humans are found all over Middle-Earth, from
desert Harad to icy Horodwaith.  They have no special adjustments to stats, and
no special strengths or weaknesses.  

Half-Elf:
     The descendants of Elves and Humans, Half-elves are better at magic than 
humans, more dextrous, stealthier and have longer sight, but are not so strong 
or tough. Half-elves sustain dexterity inherently, and are native to forest.

Hobbit:
     Hobbits are shy, retiring folk with enough good sense to share.  They live
in homes with circular entranceways built partially underground, and are the
smallest of all the races.  They are weak, have few hit points, are slow movers 
and are very poor at melee. But many of their other abilities are excellent. As 
well as having good skills, Hobbits are stealthy, lucky, and dextrous. They are 
also resistant to experience draining and loss of constitution. 
Hobbits cannot use two-handed weapons like halberds or greatswords.

Gnome:
     Gnomes are the pudgy pranksters of the dungeon; if they can kill something
in a humorous way, so much the better.  They may be small and ugly, but can
outbargain and outwit just about anyone.  They are among the frailer races, and
not powerful in combat, but are very good at magic, are stealthy and have good 
eyesight. They have innate infravision, and -- most importantly -- are immune to
paralyzation. 
Gnomes cannot use two-handed weapons like halberds or greatswords.

Dwarf:
     Dwarves are the headstrong miners and fighters of legend.  They are strong,
and tough, but not very good at casting spells. They are slow moving but have
good vision and are good at finding treasure. Dwarves are quite good at melee
combat, have innate infravision, and -- a major advantage -- can never be
blinded.  They do have one big drawback, though:  Dwarves are loudmouthed and
proud, singing in loud voices, arguing with themselves for no good reason,
screaming out challenges at imagined foes.  In other words, dwarves have a
miserable stealth. 
Dwarves cannot use two-handed weapons like halberds or greatswords.

Half-Orc:
     The bastard offspring of humans and orcs, half-orcs are ugly, strong, and
have very bad attitudes.  Their magic is poor, as are most of their skills, but 
they know how to fight and can take as much damage as they dish out. They are
sneaky, but have poor eyesight. On the other hand, half-orcs have innate 
infravision and, like orcs themselves, resist darkness and its effects.

Half-Troll:
     Half-trolls are built like blocks of granite; no other race can match their
strength or recover hitpoints as quickly.  Their hand-to-hand combat prowess is
fearsome and they are amazingly tough.  Unfortunately, they do poorly at almost
everything else. They are very bad at magic, are very noisy, have bad eyesight
and are often klutzes. At least they have innate infravision and always have 
their strength sustained.  

High-Elf:
      High-Elves are descended from those among the Elves who heard and answered
the call from the Valar at the very beginning of time, before the sun and moon
were made, and lived in the Blessed Realm for long ages before returning to
mortal lands. They are generally superior in stats, except for slightly poor
strength and hardiness. No other race is as good at magic, and none is so skilled 
with missile weapons.  High-elves are able to see the unseen, have good 
infravision, and have innate resistance to light. They are also native to forest. 
However, having lived so long and learnt so much, it is very hard for them to 
advance further. It is also rumored that High Elves will face a special challenge
if they manage to reach the Witch King. 

====== Classes ======

     There are no character classes in Ironband. Every character can potentially
fight, sneak and cast spells.
