PORTRALIS SKILLS GUIDE
-----------------------

As your character grows in experience levels, he/she will be able to
master a large number of skills, each providing it's own field of
expertise. Each levels you gain will give you 2 skill points(more if
you have high intelligence/wisdom), and you will be able to raise
your skills and become more powerful.

Skills are split in two categories: General skills and Specialized
skills. General skills offers a wider range of possibilitiesm while
specialized skills will maximize one particular domain. For example,
the Fighting skill will improve damages with all weapons you use,
while the Swords skill will improve the damages more than the
Fighting skill, but only with swords weapons.

A note about special feats. Many skills will give you some special
passive or active abilities, but keep in mind that you will only
gain them if your BASE skill is high enough. This means that any
class, race or item bonus are not counted for feat gaining. Only
your base skill is.

GENERAL SKILLS
****************

FIGHTING:
The Fighting skill is the ability to fight in melee combat. There
are a wide range of weapons in Portalis, and this skill will
allow you to make use of all of them. A particularly skilled
fighter can learn to do Power Attacks: an attack that consist
in gathering full strength, and then release a mighty blow.

Effects: - Extra damages = Base weapon damages * Fighting skill level
         - Extra unarmed damages = Base unarmed damages(1d3) * (Fighting 
           skill level)
	 - +1 to base unarmed damages dice and side every 40 points.
         - +1 unarmed blows every 20 points.

The Fighting skill allow you to use any weapons you find, and do good
damages with it. While this is a big advantage over the specialized
skills, specialized skills are stronger, and offer more varied special
feats. However, it is very frustrating to be a swords specialist, only
to find a rare special axe or a powerful artifact mace.

Also keep in mind that the Fighting skill is cumulative with the other
weapon skills. So if you have 10 Fighting skill and 4 Swords skill,
Swords counting for 50% higher than Fighting, it gives you a total
skill multiplier of 16 for damages.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Power Attack, Level 1(Active, 20 points): This special technique 
allow you to gather strength and power, and deliver very powerful 
attacks.
	
Effects: When you use Power Attack, your base Strength will be tripled,
and when the blow is delivered, total damages are doubled. Your next
serie of attacks will be extremely powerful. However, note that
using Power Attack will take two turns to charge, so it leaves you
quite vulnerable during the charging time. Also note that the
Power Attack will only be applied to your first attack. So if you
have 10 blows/round and use Power Attack, only the first one will
be empowered.

- Power Attack, Level 2(Active, 40 points): A more powerful version
of Power Attack, it also take longer to charge.
	
Effects: With the Power Attack Level 2, your strength will become
six times higher, and total damages will be tripled. However, it
takes three turns to charge.

- Power Attack, Level 3(Active, 60 points): The most powerful
version of the Power Attack, but requires a long charge time.
	
Effects: With the Power Attack Level 3, your strength will become
ten times higher, and total damages will be quadrupled. However, it
takes four turns to charge. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------

SPELLCRAFT:
The ancient mystic art of magic has been practiced for many centuries. Even
after all that time, very few understands the true secrets of magic, and
intense research and study is required to be able to use it to it's full
potential.

Effects: - Increase the damages of magical attacks by 10%. This includes any
         magical attacks: spells, monster magics, rods, magic using
         abilities, etc...
         - Increase the radius of area-of-effects type spells for every 30
         points.

Spellcraft is extremely useful for spellcasters, or any users of magical
attacks. Not only will it makes your spells much more effective, it will
also increase the radius of your spells if you raise it high enough. This
skill's main advantage is that is enhance almost any magical attacks except
for weapon brands. However, the increase is 10% compared to Elemental's 20%,
for example, and Alteration/Conjuration will provide better results in
their respective disciplines, so if playing a pure caster, you may also
want to consider a more specialized skill instead.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Enchanted Blood(Active, 10 points): A wizard using this ability can take
out a portion of his or her own blood to recover some magical energy.

Effects: You can use any amount of hp with this ability. You will gain in mana
what you lose in hp.

- Mana Shield(Active, 40 points): A sorcerer can use this ability to
sacrifice his entire magical energy to surround himself with a shield of
magical energy.

Effects: By using this, you will lose all your mana, and you will gain
some hp beyond your maximum hp. This can be very useful to take extra hits
from enemies. Note that the effects will be gone if you gain a level.

- Mystic Blood(Passive, 80 points): The most powerful sorcerers are said
to have magical or divine blood running trough their veins. This blood is
said to give them a natural advantage over all other magic users.

Effects: You gain a 25% bonus to your maximum mana.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

SHOOTING:
Shooting an enemy from a safe distance has always been considered a good
killing technique. There are many types of ranged weapons: Bows, Crossbows
and Slings. This skill allow you to become good at using all of them.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base ammos damages * Shooting skill level

While ranged attacks aren't as strong as melee attacks, they are much safer,
as melee combat can be much more risky. If you wish to invest in this skill,
consider putting more points in your Dexterity for maximum damages.

This being the general Shooting skill, it lets you use all three types
of ranged weapons: bows, crossbows and firearms.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Sharpen Ammos(Active, 20 points): It's a fact that arrows, bolts and
pebbles aren't the strongest weapons. However, a talented marksman can learn
to sharpen his or her arrows to make them more deadly.

Effects: Increase the damages of your arrows by adding an extra dice, and an
extra dice side(so if you use this on a 1d4 arrow, you will now have a 2d5
arrow).

- Quick Shots(Passive, 40 points): After a long training, a skilled marksman
will learn the ability to shoot at a great speed!

Effects: You get 1 extra shot.

- Returning Shots(passive, 70 points): Probably the most spectacular feat
a marksman can perform is the Returning Shot. By performing this special
ability, the shot will hit the enemy, and will come back to the user
afterwards.

Effects: You won't deplete your ammos while shooting. This allow you to use
those strong Special ammos without fear of losing them. Note that this
feat will not work with firearms.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

THROWING:
Although the art of throwing is not as evolved as the art of shooting, some
warriors, usually the strongest ones, prefers to throw strong weapons using
nothing more than brute strength over using bows and arrows. Finding enough
weapons to throw is harder than finding a lot of arrows, but throwing a
powerful weapon can be extremely deadly.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base item damages *
         (150% Throwing skill level)

The main weapons to be used with skills are Throwing Weapons
(boomerangs, etc...), which can be equipped in the ammo slot in place of
regular ammos, and potions, which benefits from this skill when thrown.
But you can also throw anything you find using the 'v' command, and this
skill will improve the damages. If you equip a throwing weapon in your
ammo slot, you can automatically fire it by using 'f' instead.

The damages formula uses the SUM of Strength and Dexterity for damages
calculation. Therefore, increating both stats will equally help raising
the damages of Throwing. Therefore, it can be a good complementary skill
for melee characters.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Power throw(passive, 25 points): A warrior trained in the art of throwing
can learn to throw objects with more strength than usual.

Effects: When throwing, you receive a +50% bonus to damages.

- Quick throw(passive, 40 points): A particularly talented warrior can
eventually become good enough to throw a weapon at a very high speed,
allowing him or her to immediatly throw another one right after.

Effects: You will gain an extra shot. Note that this feat will only apply
if you have no ranged weapons equipped.

- Shattering throw(passive, 70 points): A warrior trained in the art of
throwing can learn the ability to throw weapons with such as great
impact that it will damage the target's armor.

Effects: Enemies struck by thrown items will lose 50% of their defense.
If you throw more than one item, the effect will still be applied. This
can be very useful to make enemies easier to hit, and best of all,
it's a free and passive ability!

--------------------------------------------------------------------

DEFENSE:
Anyone can wear an armor, and benefit from some basic protection. However,
only a trained and conditioned can make proper use of a full suit of armor.
One must learn to be confortable, and use the armor at it's maximum
efficiency. Only then will the warrior receive a truly formidable protection
from his/her armor.

Effects: - Increase the effectiveness of your armor pieces by 20%.

Defense is a must for anyone interested in having a great AC. Not only will
it make armors more effective, the fact that it raises your base AC means
that you will receive a greater bonus from the Agility skill. Note that
the Defense skill will only give you bonuses from the base AC of your armors,
and not the to_a bonus.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- None.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

AGILITY:
Agility measures the character's aptitude at moving. An agile warrior is able
move more quickly, and can use his or her agility to dodge enemy blows more
easily. Investing in this skill will make you much better at avoiding
attacks from enemies.

Effects: - Every points gives to a to_a bonus equal to 10% of your base AC.
         - +3 bonus to_ac per points.
         - +1 to speed for every 5 points.

Agility is a great skill to invest in. Investing a lot in agility will
greatly improve your AC, and make you much faster. The higher your base
AC is, the better this skill will be.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Jump(Active, 1 points): Everyone can jump, but only an agile warrior can jump
very high and very far. By developping natural agility, a warrior can perform
amazing leaps in the air!

Effects: At first, this ability doesn't allow you to jump very far. However,
for every 10 points in Agility, you will gain an extra radius for jumping.
The more agile you are, the farther you can jump. Note that you can only
jump on a visible grid.

- Quick Swap(Passive, 30 points): An agile warrior is quick to draw the right
weapon in battle. This ability allow a trained warrior to change equipement
at great speed. 

Effects: Changing your equipement won't take you any moves, except for
body armors.

- Evade Magic(Passive, 70 points): Warriors with great agility have such
great reflexes and jumping abilities that they can sometime dodge a deadly
magical attack that would be directed toward them.

Effects: You gain a chance to avoid a magical attack. When an enemy casts
a spell at you, it'll be a test of your Agility versus the monster's level
and mind. It works just like the magic defense skill, except that you
get only 1 "power" per Agility points, and if you fail, there is no
damages reduction.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

STEALTH:
Stealth is the skill measuring how good a character is at moving without
making noise. This allow you to move without waking up enemies, or to
sneak into a shop and steal stuff more easily.

Effects: - Allow you to move without being noticed by monsters.
	 - Improve your chances of avoiding enemies while invisible.
         - Increase your odds at stealing from shops. 

Stealth can be useful for moving without waking up sleeping enemies, or
even avoiding woken enemies as well. Or, it can be useful to avoid
waking up a large pack that would easily kill you. Finally, stealing is
always nice, and you will be able to get more items for free!

The Stealth formula to determine if a monster sees you is this one:

Your "Stealth Power" is equal to (Stealth skill * 3) plus any invisibility
bonus from items you might wear. Then, it's rolled against the monster's
level and mind stat. Elites and bosses will have their power doubled,
while Uniques will have their power multiplied by 5. You can never hide
from the main quest bosses, or invisible enemies.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Hide(Active, 10 points): A master of stealth can quickly hide nearby,
either in shadows, or behind an object, allowing to temporarly escape the
sight of an enemy.

Effects: Your become invisible for 5 turns. It's a very short duration, but
it can be useful if you are chased by a strong enemy.

- Shadowblink(Active, 20 points): Stealth masters can learn the ability to make
one with the shadow, and blink away to avoid enemies. The place where he or
she reappears is unpredictable however.

Effects: Allow you to phase away. This is similar to a phase door scroll, but it's
completly free!

- Backstab(Passive, 30 points): Stealthy thieves are known for backstabing
their enemies. A high stealth will allow a thief to learn this clever art.

Effects: Allow you to perform backstabs on sleeping enemies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

COMBAT FEATS:
Combat is not merely about swinging a sword in the strongest and
fastest way. It's about combining one's abilities with other attacks
to create devastating combos. This skill measure the amount of
special attacks you may combine with your normal attacks.

Effects: - 20% chance to turn a normal blow into a special attack
        instead of a normal attack. So for every 5 points, you can
        do it one time with 100% success rate.

This skill allow you to replace your normal blows by special abilities.
When striking an enemy, if your skill is high enough, you will be asked
if you would like to replace a normal blow by a special ability. If you
say yes, the standard special abilities menu will be shown, and you will
choose one of your abilities, which will not take any moves. Not all
abilities may be used though, only those related to combat or melee
attacks. For instance, you may replace a normal blow by a Spin Attack,
but not by a Force Field. Generally, combat-like abilities can all be
used(with a few exceptions), while spell-like abilities cannot.
You will be able to replace as many blows as you want, as long as you
have the skill for it.

NOTE: All abilities that you can use with skill are noted in the
abilities guide. Consult it if you don't know which abilities work!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- None.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

DUAL WIELD:
Dual Wield is the art of wielding two weapons at once, and use both
of them at the same time in battle. A warrior skilled in wielding two
weapons can strike the opponent more often, using the second weapon,
and thus can be very devastating. Of course, it is difficult to wield
two weapons at once with perfect balance, and therefore training
in this skill is necessary to anyone who wants to use two weapons
with devastating power.

To wield two weapons with no penalities, you must have a skill equal
to at least three times the weapon's weight. Of course, this means
lighter weapons are easier to dual wield. For example, it takes about
two points in this skill to wield two daggers without penalities
to blows and to_hit, while you need at least 45 points to perfectly
dual wield broad swords! Every 5 points below that amount will give you
one less blow with that weapon. Also, unless your skill is high enough, 
you will always only get half the number of blows you would normally 
get for a weapon on your second weapon.

Not having enough skill also affects your ability to_hit. The to_hit
bonus/penality is calculated based on the average of your two weapons
weight. Then, you must have a skill of at least three times that amount
to get no penalities. Every points below that will result in a 2% penality
to your to_hit bonus(up to a maximum penality of 95%). For every points
higher, your to_hit bonus increases by 2%, so if your skill is very high,
you will actually become better at hitting while wielding two weapons than
wielding only one weapon!

Effects: - Increases your chances to hit while dual wielding.
         - Increases the number of blows available when dual wielding.

Dual Wielding can allow you to get a lot of attacks per rounds, as well
as giving you bonus hit rate if your skill is high. However, consider
the fact that the points spent here will not raise your damages with the
actual weapons, and spreading points between the weapon skills, Agility,
Defense and Combat Feat skills will be harder to accomplish effectively.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Ambidexterity(Passive, 20 points): A warrior who trains hard in the art
of dual wielding will eventually become perfectly ambidextrous, and will
be able to wield both weapons with equal skills.

Effects: You will get as many blows for the second weapon than you get for
the first.

- Dual Strike(Active, 40 points, combat feat): A skilled warrior is able
to use both weapons at once to perform a very powerful attack.

Effects: Attack with two weapons at once. The damages of both weapons are
added together, and then doubled.

- Dual Block(Passive, 70 points): A very skilled and ambidextrous warrior
is able to use both weapons to parry blows more easily.

Effects: Gives you a chance to block enemies attacks when wielding two
weapons. The base block chance is 20.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

LEADERSHIP:
Leadership measure a character's ability to lead a group, or even an
entire army. Generals, military commanders, kings and any other leaders
knows that to make an army effective, you need to be a skilled leader
who knows how to get the best from his or her soldiers.

Effects: - Increase the damages of both melee and magical attacks from
           friendly monsters. Leadership is used to boost melee damages
           the same way as Fighting would for you, and it increases
           monsters magic damages by 10% per points just like Spellcraft
           would for you.
         - Gives friendly monsters a better chance to hit. The bonus
           is equal to ((Leadership * Leadership) / 2). So with a Leadership
           skill of 50, the bonus hit rate is 1250.

Leadership makes friendly monsters more powerful. If you like to use
summon spells, or recruit creatures, this skill can really help you
getting the best out of them. A character with a high leadership can
overwhelm the enemy with a large number of creatures, or a small
group of very strong creatures.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Heal Troops(Active, 5 points): Troops gets wounded on the battlefield.
It is a fact. Learning the art of healing the wounded is necessary to
win any battles.

Effects: You gain an healing ball spell with a radius of 3. It's power
is 1000 for every points in Leadership.

- Morale Boost(Active, 20 points): Slow and lazy soldiers have never been
useful on the battlefield. By giving them a morale boost, this makes them
act faster and better.

Effects: All friendly creatures around you, in a radius of 5, get their
speed boosted by 25%. Their hit rate is also raised by 50%. This ability
will only work once on a particular monster.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

ALCHEMY:
Your skill at brewing potions from various components, and possibly
some other alchemical items as well. Some alchemists use their skills
to make curative potions, others are skilled at making deadly poisons.
Some war alchemists also brew instable, explosive potions to throw
at their enemies.

Effects: - Allow you to combine items to create potions and possibly
         other alchemical items(any items that's not an armor or weapon).
	 - Increase the effectiveness of all potions.

Alchemy gives you the use of the "Combine Items" command, which allow
you to combine two items into one item. If you combine two items,
you will need to have a sufficient alchemical skill to actually
succeed in making it. For instance, brewing a potion normally found
on level 5 requires an Alchemy skill of at least 5.

And about alchemical recipes...it's up to you to find them!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Decompose Item(Active, 2 points): Items are made from various
components. By using various processes and techniques, you can
disassemble one item to get the components it was originally
made from. Not all items can be decomposed.

Effects: Destroy an item, and place it's two components in your
inventory. Some items cannot be crafted, and will not give you
any components. Note that in order to decompose non-alchemic
items, your Crafting skill must be high enough. For example,
to decompose an iron long sword, your skill needs to be 30.

- Alchemic Branding(Active, 10 points): A skilled alchemist can use a magic
potion to permanently brand a weapon with it's powers.

Effects: Add a brand to a weapon equal to 25% of the potion's power, and
up to your Alchemy skill times 100. The element is the same as the potion's.

- Alchemic Resistances(Active, 20 points): A skilled alchemist can use a magic
potion to permanently add a magical resistance to an element.

Effects: Use a potion to add a resistance bonus to an item. The bonus added
is equal to 10% of the potion's base power, and is added as a resistance to
the potion's element. However, if the sum of the item's resistances is
equal or greater than 25% of your Alchemy skill, you will not be able to add
any more resistances.


--------------------------------------------------------------------

CRAFTING:
Your skill at crafting various weapons, armors and objects from
various components. A skilled smith will be able to create many
types of weapons and armors, and even some unique weapons only
available to the most talented.

Effects: - Allow you to create weapons, armors and other items.
	   - Improve quality of crafted weapons and armors.

Crafting, like Alchemy, gives you the use of the "Combine Items" 
command, which allow you to combine two items into one item. It
works exactly the same way, except it's your Crafting skill
that will be used.

Some items might require the use of both Crafting and Alchemy.
For instance, an item that would require a material component
and an alchemical one, if it has a depth level of 30, you would
need a Crafting skill of 15 and al Alchemy of 15 to create it.

And about crafting combinations...it's up to you to find them!

NOTE: If you use a magical item for crafting, the resulted item
(if any) will NOT be magical, so be warned!

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Decompose Item(Active, 2 points): Items are made from various
components. By using various processes and techniques, you can
disassemble one item to get the components it was originally
made from. Not all items can be decomposed.

Effects: Destroy an item, and place it's two components in your
inventory. Some items cannot be crafted, and will not give you
any components. Note that in order to decompose non-alchemic
items, your Crafting skill must be high enough. For example,
to decompose an iron long sword, your skill needs to be 30.

- Enchanted items crafting(Passive, 10 points): A skilled craftsman
can craft items possessing magical powers. This allows a skilled
craftsman to make up for his/her lack of battle abilities by
crafting an item that will provide these abilities.

Effects: For every 5 points in Crafting, your item wil gain one
ability point. You can then use the 'N' command, just like you
would on a level gaining item, and spend these points in various
abilities, thus making your item magical, and much more powerful.
If the item you made required a combination of Alchemy and Crafting,
the points gained are based on the average between the two skills.
Once you raise any of the item's ability, it will be considered
"enchanted", and it's name will be displayed orange. It is these
orange-named items that are needed for the Enchanter class. Note that
once they are enchanted, you can no longer decompose them.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

MAGIC DEFENSE:
Magical attacks are deadly and accurate, and often comes from the shadow
in an unpredictable manner. It takes supernatural skill to avoid such
attacks. And yet, some adventurers do train to develop that needed
supernatural skill.


Effects: - Allow you to avoid magical attacks.

Magic Defense will give you a chance to avoid taking any damages from
magical attacks. This can greatly help you avoiding an oterwise deadly
spell coming from the shadows. To successfully avoid a magic spell, you
must win a roll:
(1 to ((Magic Defense) * 10)) versus (1 to (Monster's level + monster's mind))

If you win the roll, you will take no damages from the spell.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- None.




SPECIALIZED SKILLS
********************

--------------------------------------------------------------------

SWORDS:
The sword is probably the most popular weapon. There are many
types of swords, including Long Swords, Broad Swords, Katanas
and Sabers. Boosting your skill with the swords makes you
better at using them, allowing you to deal much more damages.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base sword damages * (150% Swords skill level)

Swords are the most abundant weapons in the game. They offer
a wide array of choices, and the most powerful swords are
all one-handed and are very strong.. Choosing the swords skill 
is a good choice if you wish to combine a good offense with a 
good defense.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Parry(Passive, 10 points): With enough training, one can learn
to block enemy attacks with a sword.
	
Effects: Allows you to parry blows with a sword. The basic block chance
is 10, and is added to whatever base AC bonus the sword may have.

- Sword Spin(Active, 20 points, combat feat): A well trained warrior 
can use this ability to hit multiple foes surrounding him/her. 
	
Effects: Perform a spin attack, and damage enemies surrounding
you. The damages are 50% higher than a normal attack.
	
- Fencer's Spirit(Passive, 50 points): After a long training, a
warrior can eventually learn to use a sword with a greatly
superior accuracy. Such a warrior will have an easy time hitting
most foes in combat.

Effects: Double your to_hit while wielding a sword.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

Blunt:
Blunt weapons include maces, morning stars, war hammers and other
blunt weapons. While not as common and popular as swords, Blunt
weapons offers both good one-handed weapons and two-handed weapons.
Their main advantage lies in the fact that blows from blunt weapons
delivers a lot of impact, and some very useful feats can be performed
to take advantage of this.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base Blunt weapon damages * (150% Blunt skill level)

Blunt weapons offers a nice alternative to the swords. There are some
very good one-handed weapons, and some powerful two-handed weapons as well.
While the one-handed weapons aren't as good as those in the Swords, and the
two-handed in the Polearms, Blunt weapons offers some unique and powerful 
abilities to a skilled user.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Smash(Active, 15 points, combat feat): A warrior using this ability can 
deliver a blow with such an impact that not only will it do more damages,
it will shatter a part of target's defense while knocking them away.

Effects: Enemy is damaged, and is knocked away, allowing you to avoid
direct physical contact. The enemy will also lose 10% of it's defense.
This attack does 50% more damages than a regular attack.

- Dizzy Smash(Active, 40 points, combat feat): This ability is similar 
to Smash, except that it is focused on target's head instead of entire body.
The enemy will not lose defense, but has a chance to become confused
for a few turns after the attack.

Effects: Enemy is damaged, and is knocked away, allowing you to avoid
direct physical contact. The enemy is also confused for a few turns.
Note that Uniques, Elites and Bosses cannot be confused. Dizzy Smash does
more damages than Smash, doing twice the damages of a normal attack.
Monsters will try to resist the confusion. It will then be a test of your
Blunt skill and Strength versus the monster's level and strength.

- Shattering Blow(Active, 70 points, combat feat): A very well trained 
warrior can use his or her weapon to deliver a blow with a lot of impact, 
and focus the impact on target's armor, scales and/or bones. By doing so,
the target's armor, scales and bones will shatter, and the victim
will become extremely vulnerable.

Effects: Reduce target's defense to 0. Enemies will try to evade it,
so you have to win a test between your Blunt skill versus the monster's
dexterity and level.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

POLEARMS:
Polearms are spears, halberds and other, similar weapons. Most of them
are two-handed weapons, and are great for dealing a lot of damages.
Polearms are known for being able to strike foes from a short distance. 

Effects: -Extra damages = Base polearm weapon damages * 
          (150% Polearms skill level)

Polearms are probably the most deadly weapons in the game. The drawback to
this is that they are two-handed, and you won't be able to use a shield
most of the time. You will eventually get the ability to parry with polearms,
but this is nowhere near as good as using a powerful shield. However,
the last spear ability, Impale, is extremely deadly if you have high
strength.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Thrust(Active, 5 points, combat feat): A warrior trained in polearms can 
strike a foe from a short distance. This allow him or her to strike the 
opponents before they come close, possibly killing them.

Effects: Thrust will attack from a short distance. If there is an enemy
next to you, and another one behind it, you can strike both of them at once!
Thrust only gives one blow, but it does more damages than a regular blow.
It does twice the damages of a normal blow.


- Parry(Passive, 25 points): Polearms are long, and are therefore excellent
weapons to parry attacks from enemies. They are even better than swords,
as they are held with both hands, offering more stability when they come
in contact with the enemy's weapon.

Effects: Allows you to parry blows with a polearm. The basic block chance
is 20, and is added to whatever base AC bonus the polearm may have. 

	
- Impale(Passive, 90 points): A master of the polearms can use all his or
her strength to pierce trough an opponent's body, and slay the vital organs.
This gives the victim an atrocious, generally fatal wound.

Effects: Double your base weapon's damage roll. If you have a strong
weapon, this can be deadly.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

DAGGERS:
Daggers are short bladed weapons, ressembling swords, but much smaller
and concealable. Usually not the warrior's favorite weapon, daggers
can be used much quicker than swords due to their light weight, and
because they are small, they can easily pierce trough a target's armor.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base dagger weapon damages * 
          (150% Daggers skill level)

Daggers aren't powerful, but they give the wielder a lot of attacks 
per rounds, making them quite useful, especially magically branded
daggers. The special dagger feats can also be very powerful if
used correctly.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Piercing Stab(Passive, 5 points): Because of their size, a dagger can
easily pierce trough a target's armor. This allow a trained warrior to
hit the opponent's vital parts more easily.

Effects: 25% bonus to your hit rate when striking with a dagger.

- Eyes Stab(Active, 30 points, combat feat): Stabbing with a dagger is quick 
and easy, but this also allow a warrior to easily strike specific parts of 
the body. By stabbing the target's eyes, they will be blinded, greatly 
lowering their attack rating, and because they can't see, they will have 
trouble dodging, and will lose a potion of their defense.

Effects: Reduce target's attack rating by 50% and defense by 25%. You
may only use this once on a particular enemy. This does not work against
elites, bosses and uniques.

- Fatal Stab(Active, 80 points): Taking advantage of the fact that daggers
are extremely easy to draw out, this dangerous and vicious technique
consists in quickly stabbing an opponent's vital point, and force the
dagger hard so that it will remain in the victim's body. The infection
and pain is incredible, and the target will become severly wounded and
unable to fight due to the pain.

Effects: To use this technique, you must sacrifice a dagger in your
inventory to struck it into the monster's mody. The more powerful
the dagger, the better this will work. The monster will instantly
lose 10% of it's attack rating, defense, hp and speed, and will
lose an extra 10% for every extra pval the weapon has, up to a maximum
of 90%. Elites, Bosses and Uniques will only lose up to 30%. Note
that using this technique requires a successful hit test. If you miss
the monster, the dagger is still lost.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

AXES:
Axes could be best described as a mix between an edged weapon and an
Blunt weapon, as the top, while heavy, does not give the impact of
an Blunt weapon, but is very sharp, although not as sharp as a
sword would be. Nevertheless, axes are very strong weapons, and
they vary in size and weight. There are the small, light, one-handed
axes and the heavy, two-handed battle axes. Axes are very popular
amongst dwarves.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base axe weapon damages * (150% Axes skill level)

The axes are the jack-of-all-trades of all weapons. They combine several
advantages of the swords, Blunt and polearms weapons. For instance, you
will find good one-handed axes and good two-handed axes, although they
might not be as powerful as their swords or polearms counterparts. However,
both types are good, so if you like switching between one-handed
and two-handed weapons, then the axes are for you.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Chop(Active, 10 points, combat feat): The first thing a warrior must 
learn about the axe is that it is a chopping weapon. Knowing that, a 
trained warrior can perform a very strong chopping attack that will 
damage opponent's armor, and give a painful blow.

Effects: Does damages, and reduce target's defense by 25%. This ability
does twice the damages of a normal attack.

- Mutilate Legs(Active, 40 points): A violent technique employed by strong
and/or brutal axemen, this technique can instantly mutilate the legs of
the enemy in a single blow(or anything else that allow them to move).

Effects: Does damages, and prevent monster from moving. Note that it only
prevent the monster from moving, it does not prevent it to attack or cast
spells. Uniques, elites and bosses are not affected. Other enemies will
attempt to resist. Then, it will be a test of your Axe skill and your
strength versus the monster's level and monster's strength.

- Mutilate Arms(Active, 70 points): Another violent technique, this
will allow a skilled axeman to instantly mutilate the arms(or means
of attacks) of an enemy.

Effects: Does damages, and prevent monster from using physical attacks.
They can still use their magical attacks. Does not work against elites,
bosses and uniques. Other enemies will attempt to resist. Then, it 
will be a test of your Axe skill and your strength versus the monster's 
level and monster's strength.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

RODS:
Rods are similar to wands, but are a little bigger, and can be used as a
weapon. Rods aren't powerful, but the fact that they make spellcasting
much easier encourage some wizards to train to use them effectively.
Should their magic be useless against a foe, they will still be able to
use their rod as a secondary weapon. 

Effects: -Extra damages = Base rod damages * (150% Rods skill level)
         - Increases rods zapping and activations by 20%.
         - Increases rods spells bonus by 3%.

Rods have several benefits for spellcasters. Equipping a rod will add
a random amount of power to all your non-melee spells based on their
base damages. Also, all rods are generated with special activations.
And finally, all rods contains some spell damages bonus, making them
the weapon of choice for spellcasters.

When using the 'z' command to "zap" a rod, you'll use an equipped crystal
to generate a bolt or ball attack of a certain element. The formula used
is the same as spells, except that it uses the Rods skill as both a base
stat and a specialized spells school for calculating damages. If you wield
two rods, you'll be able to use two zaps in a row.

Activated spells of rods use your standard casting stats(whiever is the
highest between Intelligence and Wisdom), although the Rods skill do act
like a specialized magic skill for the purpose of adding damages.

Rods makes normal spells stronger as well, but also Soul Powers and
Monsters powers as well.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Infinite Charges(Passive, 15 points): Those trained to use a rod can learn
to control the amount of power used in the activation. They learn how to
use enough power to fully activate the crystal, while not depleting it's
energy.

Effects: When you zap a rod, your crystal will not lose it's charges.


- Amplifed Recovery(Passive, 30 points): The user of a rod can use it to 
amplify his or her magical energy. This allow the user to regenerate his 
or her mana at an accelerated rate.

Effects: You recover your mana quicker.

	
- Improved Spellcasting(Passive, 70 points): A master of the rod can use it
to charge up magic spells before casting them. This allow the spells to be
much more powerful than they would normally be.

Effects: You receive a 50% bonus on your Spellcraft and all specialized
spell skills.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

MARTIAL ARTS:
Martial arts have been taught for generations among the various monk orders.
They consist of a variety of fighting techniques, allowing the monk to 
treat his body as a weapon or an extension of his weapon. These once well- 
guarded secrets are now available for every warriors to learn.

NOTE: The only affect that works with a shield or ranged weapon is the
AC Bonus

Effects when using no weapons:
- +2 to hit per skill points(+1 with Hard/Dragon armor)
- +5 to_damages per skill points(+2 with Hard/Dragon armor)
- Extra damages = Base unarmed damages(1d3) * (150% Martial arts 
skill level)
- +1 to base damages dice and side every 15 points.
- +1 blows for every 10 points
- +2 AC for every skill point (if not wearing Hard/Dragon armor)
Effects when using melee weapon(s):
- +2 to hit per skill point (+1 with Hard/Dragon armor)
- +5 to_damages per skill point (+2 with Hard/Dragon armor)
- Bonus attacks = Martial Arts Skill/weapon weight in lbs
weapon weight is treated as being 10 lbs if it is less than 10 lbs
- +2 AC for every skill point (if not wearing Hard/Dragon armor)

Martial arts offer a nice alternative to weapons. While you won't get all of
the bonuses awarded for wielding a weapon, using no weapon or a claw/knuckle
weapon will let you use one skill for both effective skills and also grant
the above bonuses to hit, to damage, and to number of blows. Also be
aware that at high skill levels, no weapons in the game will allow you
to do as much damage AND also have a high number of attacks like martial 
arts will when used unarmed.

The Martial arts skill also enhances the use of melee weapons using special
martial art techniques known as weapon katas. You will not be able to use your
martial art skill to enhance your effective skill with any melee weapon other
than claws/knuckles (Eg, You must still rely on fighting and/or one of the 
specialty weapon skills such as swords or polearms to have an effective skill.)
Instead of the bonuses for unarmed combat, martial arts weapon katas will give 
you bonuses to hit, to damage and bonus blows, as well as base AC if you wear 
no armor or soft armor. Also note that none of the martial arts skill feats 
will work when using a weapon, but the weapon skill feats will work normally.

The Monk and it's upgrade, the High Monk, heavily support the Martial Arts skill.

Your bonus base AC from Martial arts (and from the Monk ability Unarmored combat)
is not boosted by the defense skill, instead, the graceful and agile movements of
martial arts gives you an extra bonus from the agility skill. If you are planning on
focusing on martial arts, then your skill points in agility will be much more
effective in raising your overall AC than your skill in defense.

Martial arts is also the skill that will boost your melee attacks when
playing as a Monster, or while morphed into a monster. If you plan on
playing the Monster race, or on morphing a lot, consider the Martial Arts
skill!

SPECIAL FEATS: (will only work while unarmed, not compatible with weapon katas)

- Power Punch(Active, 15 points, combat feat): A warrior trained in martial 
arts is able to infuse his or her fists with inner energy, allowing him 
or her to deliver a very powerful punch that will also reduce target's defense.

Effects: Deliver a punch that deals twice normal damages and reduce enemy's
defense by 25%. In other words, the more you use it, the easier it is to
damage your foes with melee attacks!

- Block & Dodge(Passive, 40 points): The art of dodging and blocking is very
important to the martial artist, who generally shun armors and shields. 
A well trained monk will learn to avoid blows from enemies by either 
blocking attacks with arms, or dodging blows entirely.

Effects: If you are unarmed, and you're not wearing heavy armor, you get
a base blocking chance of 10. It will be further increased by your gloves
base AC bonus.

- Stunning Blow(Active, 60 points, combat feat): Using this technique, a
martial artist can paralyze an enemy with his/her fist.

Effects: This will paralyze monsters for 3 turns. They will attempt to resist,
and it will be a test between your Martial Arts skill plus Strength versus
the monster's level plus strength. This will not work on uniques, elites and 
bosses. If the monster succeeds in resisting, it will not be paralyzed, but 
will still take normal damages.


--------------------------------------------------------------------

BOW:
Bows are used to shoot arrows at enemies. They are also the traditional
weapon of the elvish race. Compared to the crossbow, the bow is slightly
weaker and a less accurate, but a skilled bow marksman can reload quicker,
and shoot in great arcs, allowing them to hit a specific enemy within
a large group.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base arrow damages * (150% Bow skill level)

The Marksman class has a level 6 ability for every ranged weapons. The bow
is the Multiple Arrows ability, and allow you to shoot many arrows at once.
Considering the Multiple Arrows ability will help you decide whether or not
you want to specialize in bows.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Sharpen Arrows(Active, 15 points): Most arrows are not particularly powerful.
This technique allow you to maximize their power.

Effects: Increase the damages of your arrows by adding one extra dice, and three
extra dice side(so if you use this on a 1d4 arrow, you will now have a 2d7
arrow).

- Arc Shooting(Active, 30 points): A marksman trained with the bow can learn
to shoot arrows in an arc, allowing him/her to strike a specific enemy
within a group.

Effects: Allow you to attack any monsters directly in a radius of 5 around you.

- Rapid Shots(Passive, 50 points): Masters of the bow can shoot and reload
with legendary speed.

Effects: For every 50 points in the Bows skill, you gain one extra shot. Note
that since this is considered a feat, bonus from items will not increase the
number of shots you get.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

CROSSBOW:
Crossbows are a more advanced type of ranged weapon. Crossbows typically fires
with greater speed and accuracy than bows, and thus deliver more damages.
Skilled users of crossbows are able to shoot with great accuracy and great
power.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base bolt damages * (150% Crossbow skill level)

Crossbows are more damaging than bows, and offers better hit rate and much
better damages at higher skill levels. The drawback is that crossbows will
require reloading. Crossbow users can also use the Marksman's Charged Bolt
ability to shoot an explosive bolt and do fire damages.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Sharpen Bolts(Active, 15 points): Most bolts are not particularly powerful.
This technique allow you to maximize their power.

Effects: Increase the damages of your bolts by adding one extra dice, and three
extra dice side(so if you use this on a 1d5 bolt, you will now have a 2d8
bolt).

- Crossbow Accuracy(Passive, 30 points): It is much easier to aim with a
crossbow than it is with a bow, as you do not have to hold the string pulled
while aiming. A skilled crossbow marksman can aim with great accuracy.

Effects: When you shoot with a crossbow, you receive 50% bonus hit rate.

- Crossbow Mastery(Passive, 60 points): Crossbows shoots with great speed
and accuracy. A master of the crossbow can deliver lots of damages with
a crossbow.

Effects: Double the base damage roll of your bolts, resulting in higher
damages.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

FIREARMS:
Guns are the most advanced weaponry available in Portralis. The latest
technological wonder offers ranged attacks of extreme accuracy and power,
and is widely superior to both the bow and crossbow. Even the lowliest
pistol can easily be as deadly as the most powerful bow.

Effects: -Extra damages = Base shot damages * (150% Firearms skill level)

Of the three types of ranged weapons, firearms are easily the most powerful,
and the most varied, offering several types of weapons, from the one-handed,
dual wieldable pistols, to the extremely powerful two-handed rifles. 
However, being a more advanced technology, firearms are an
extremely costly option. Ammos for guns are much more costly than arrows
and bolts. Also, except for the crude, basic models, guns are usually not
sold in regular weapon shops, and will have to be found, or bought at
special stores. Also note that different type of guns uses different types
of ammos. For example, pistol bullets will not work with rifles.
Finally, like crossbows, guns requires reloading, though not necessarely
after every shots. It all depends on the ammo capacity of the gun.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Sharpen Shots(Active, 15 points): Bullets are already powerful, but they
are costly. Maximizing their power is a good way to make sure only one will
be needed to kill your target.

Effects: Increase the damages of your shots by adding one extra dice, and
three extra dice side(so if you use this on a 1d2 shot, you will now have a 2d5
shot).

- Stun Shots(Passive, 40 points): Guns delivers a great impact. A good
gunner can shoot shots that takes advantage of this impact, and stun the
enemies.

Effects: When you fire with a gun, you have a chance to stun the enemy
for 3 turns. Whether you succeed or not depends on your Firearms skill and
your dexterity versus the monster's level and strength, stronger enemies
being able to take impact more easily. Enemies that cannot be stunned
are not affected by this ability.

- Shattering Shots(Passive, 70 points): A master gunner can use the great
impact of gun shots to completely shatter the enemy's armor, no matter how
hard it is.

Effects: When a shot hits the enemy, a test will be applied of your Firearms
skill and dexterity, versus the monster's level and base defense. If you
succeed, the monster's defense becomes 0. Otherwise, the monster still
loses 20% of it's current defense. Elites/bosses immune to physical attacks
and monsters with 100% resistance to physical will not be affected.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

ELEMENTAL:
The Elemental school of magic focus in the mastery of the various energies
and elemental forces such as fire, electricity, water, wind, etc... One
who trains in elemental magic learns to shape these energies into powerful
bolts and balls of energy, and cast them at enemies.

Effects: - Increases Elemental spells damages by 20%.
         - Increases radius of non-chain Elemental spells by 1 for
         every 20 points.

Elemental is the offensive school of magic. All Elemental spells are meant
to do direct damages to enemies. If you plan on building a pure mage
character, consider raising this skill.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Elemental Adept(Passive, 25 points): An adept of Elemental magic learns
to create Elemental spells that consumes less magical energy, and are
just as effective.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Elemental spells by 25%.

- Elemental Expert(Passive, 50 points): An expert of Elemental magic learns
to create Elemental spells that consumes even less energy than the adept.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Elemental spells by 33%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

- Elemental Master(Passive, 100 points): A master of Elemental magic creates
very powerful spells with few magical energy.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Elemental spells by 50%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

ALTERATION:
The Alteration school of magic focus in altering the aspect of things and
living beings. A wizard schooled in Alteration magic can weaken, empower
or even polymorph his/her enemies, or can enhance his/her own physical
attributes to become more powerful.

Effects: - Increases the power-based Alteration spells power by 5%(does not
         improve the "Life Blast" effect).
         - Increases success rate of Alteration spells that can be resisted.
         - Increases radius of non-chain Alteration spells by 1 for
         every 20 points.

While Elemental spellcasters focus in damagins enemies, Alteration
spellcasters focus in disabling, paralyzing, weakening or polymorphing
enemies. Weakening a monster before fighting it is often a good strategy,
especially if the monster is very powerful. Or, you can use Alteration
spells to give you resistance to physical and magical attacks to reduce
the damages of powerful attacks.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Alteration Adept(Passive, 25 points): An adept of Alteration magic learns
to create Alteration spells that consumes less magical energy, and are
just as effective.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Alteration spells by 25%.

- Alteration Expert(Passive, 50 points): An expert of Alteration magic learns
to create Alteration spells that consumes even less energy than the adept.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Alteration spells by 33%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

- Alteration Master(Passive, 100 points): A master of Alteration magic creates
very powerful spells with few magical energy.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Alteration spells by 50%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

MYSTICISM:
The Mysticism school of magic contains spells that affects the bodies and
mind of the living, as well as their mind, magical energies and thoughts.
Mystics have control over life and death, and possess spells that can heal,
harm, restore attributes and even spells that causes heavy damages to
peoples or creatures of certain alignments or allegiances.

Effects: - Increases the power of hp restoring spells by 10%.
         - Increases the power of other Mysticism spells by 20%.
         - Increase the power of mana restoring spells by 10%(wisdom-casting
           only).
         - Increase the radius of non-chain Mysticism spells that affect others
         by 1 for every 20 points.
         - Increases success rate of Mysticism spells that can be resisted.

The Mysticism school of magic is perfect for healers and traditional priests,
who generally learn restorative spells. Mysticism can also be a good
offensive school, especially against undeads, demons and evil creatures.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Mysticism Adept(Passive, 25 points): An adept of Mysticism magic learns
to create Mysticism spells that consumes less magical energy, and are
just as effective.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Mysticism spells by 25%.

- Mysticism Expert(Passive, 50 points): An expert of Mysticism magic learns
to create Mysticism spells that consumes even less energy than the adept.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Mysticism spells by 33%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

- Mysticism Master(Passive, 100 points): A master of Mysticism magic creates
very powerful spells with few magical energy.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Mysticism spells by 50%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

CONJURATION:
The Conjuration school of magic is the school of summoning. Conjuration
wizards learn spells that summon creatures and items, but they can also
summon various forces such as storms or blizzards.

Effects: - Increases the power of the damaging fields by 20%.
         - Increases the number of summoned creatures by 5%.
         - Increases the duration of summoned items by 10%.
	 - For ammo conjuration, you get 1 extra ammo every 2 points.

Conjuration focus mostly on summoning creatures and items. It can be
a powerful school to complement melee or ranged fighters, and this
is the school of choice for summoners.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Conjuration Adept(Passive, 25 points): An adept of Conjuration magic learns
to create Conjuration spells that consumes less magical energy, and are
just as effective.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Conjuration spells by 25%.

- Conjuration Expert(Passive, 50 points): An expert of Conjuration magic learns
to create Conjuration spells that consumes even less energy than the adept.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Conjuration spells by 33%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

- Conjuration Master(Passive, 100 points): A master of Conjuration magic creates
very powerful spells with few magical energy.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Conjuration spells by 50%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

DIVINATION:
The Divination school of magic specializes in detection spells. Spells
that detect objects and creatures are part of this school, as well as
spells that are able to reveal unseen parts of the current area.
However, skilled diviners have developped spells of offensive natures,
and it is said that the most powerful diviners can even alter their
own fate.

Effects: - Increases the power of map revealing spells by 20%.
         - Increases the duration of telepathy spells by 20%.
         - -1 to spell creation cost per points.
         - Increases success rate of Divination spells that can be resisted.

Divination has spells that offers detection and map-revealing effects.
However, the most interesting and unique effects are the Divination
offensive spell, as well as spells that allows you to twist your own
fate. A skilled Divination mage can change his or her fate, and decide
what they will find and/or encounter when exploring new dungeons.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Divination Adept(Passive, 25 points): An adept of Divination magic learns
to create Divination spells that consumes less magical energy, and are
just as effective.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Divination spells by 25%.

- Divination Expert(Passive, 50 points): An expert of Divination magic learns
to create Divination spells that consumes even less energy than the adept.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Divination spells by 33%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

- Divination Master(Passive, 100 points): A master of Divination magic creates
very powerful spells with few magical energy.

Effects: Reduce creation cost of Divination spells by 50%. This overrides
the previous bonus.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

MUSIC:
Music has long been used to entertain, gather and communicate. However,
some peoples went a step further, and have been able to use their
songs to produce magical effects. Bard adventurers have been known
to use songs and music to charm their enemies, support their comrades
and even cause damages to their opponents. This skill allows you to
master this art to produce charisma-based magical effects.

Effects: - Increases the power/success rate of songs.

Music will offer magical abilities based on charisma. Music focus on
charming and causing ailments to enemies, supporting friendly monsters
and sound-based damages. Most songs are passive effects that are always
active and affect monsters around you, although some songs are instant
effects.

Music is composed from various music books that are split in melodies,
harmonies and rhythms. By finding and combining the various components, you
can create new songs. To create a new song, use the 'h' command. You will
then have to choose a melody, harmony and rhythm, which will make up
the new song. There are three types of songs:

Passive: A passive song that affects things around as you move or pass
         a turn using 'g'. Only one passive or effect song may be active
         at a time. You can turn it Off or back On using 'K'. The song
         will remain active forever until you turn it Off.

Instant: Projects the song's effect, affecting enemies or allies around
         you. The effect is instant, and will not turn On any passive
         effects. Instant songs can be used at any times.

Effect:  Effect songs are just like Passive songs, except they will also
         affect you. This is useful for healing and boosting songs, but
         be careful, there is no restrictions on Effect songs, and if you
         set a damaging song to be an Effect, you will take damages!
         Only one passive or effect song may be active at a time. You can
         turn it Off or back On using 'K'. The song will remain active forever
         until you turn it Off.

You can compose up to 15 songs. Note that you can only compose songs while
you're outside in the wilderness or in a town, you cannot compose songs
while in dungeons, or in indoor areas.


SPECIAL FEATS:

- Naturally Talented Musician(Passive, 1 point): To produce a great music,
most peoples needs to use instruments in combination to their voice. However,
those who practice the art of magical songs are able to simulate those
sound effects with only their voice. As their skill grows, so does this
power.

Effects: Reduce charisma requirement of songs by 1 for every 2 points in
Music. Only your base Music skill will contribute to this feat.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

MINING:
The Mining skill is the ability to dig through dungeon walls and find
ores and treasures in the process. Many miners also learn to use their
trusty pickaxes as weapons, as mines and caves are often inhabited by
dangerous creatures. It is rumored that there are ancient ruins burrowed
deep in the Portralis underground, and many adventurers learned the
Mining skill in the hope of one day finding these ruins...

Effects: -Extra damages = Base pickaxe damages * (150% Mining skill level)
         - +1% per points to remove a wall regardless of your strength.
         - Gives you a chance to find gold or ores when digging through
         "mineral" walls. It improves with points in the skill, along
         with the dungeon level. (will not work in special/indoor levels)

For those who only place a few points in the skill, it will make digging
through walls much easier and faster. However, if you place enough points,
the skill will make finding items easier, will allow you to reshape the
dungeon by digging pits or making ceiling crumble, and master of Mining
will be able to discover hidden ruins where treasures and ancient monsters
might lurk.

Pickaxes, while a little weaker and heavier than normal axes, gives you
a bonus to Mining, so they can make descent weapons in their own right.

SPECIAL FEATS:

- Treasure Finding(Passive, 15 points): Skilled miners are able to dig
deeper and sense the presence of hidden treasures buried inside the
dungeon's walls.
	
Effects: Once you gain this feat, you will be able to find other type
of items than just gold and ores when digging through walls. The higher
your Mining skill, the better the chance of finding rarer items.
Note that like gold and ores, this feat will not work in special/indoor
levels.

- Ceiling Crumble(Active, 40 points): Expert miners who explore
the dungeons of Portralis have learned to use their skill in a strategic
way. They have learned to make the ceiling crumble to block the way or
to fill a pit and cross it.
	
Effects: This feat allows you to create rubble around you. Also, if used
on a pit, you can turn it into floor.

- Hidden Ruins(Passive, 70 points): Most Mining masters were all inspired
by the promise of one day discovering ancient ruins buried deep within
the dungeons. And thanks to incredible dedication, this dream might just
become reality!
	
Effects: In addition to gold, ores and items, this will give you a small
chance to discover an ancient ruin for you to explore. There is no limits
to what you can find inside. You could end up finding legendary treasures,
or facing terrible monsters. Good luck!
