Sometimes, when you kill a monster, it will drop a soul gem. These soul
gems can be imbued into rings and amulets, by using the 'B' bind command.

Souls level up as you fight, their maximum level is level 6. Their pval is
equal to their level. As they level up, they gain more resists and abilities.

To gain level 2, you need to kill  200 monsters worth   1 xp or more
To gain level 3, you need to kill  400 monsters worth   8 xp or more
To gain level 4, you need to kill  600 monsters worth  27 xp or more
To gain level 5, you need to kill  800 monsters worth  64 xp or more
To gain level 6, you need to kill 1000 monsters worth 125 xp or more

As you can see from the chart, there are thresholds associated with each
level. Kills that give less XP than the threshold don't count toward
leveling up the items. When I say kill monsters, I really mean anything that
gains XP. Disarming traps also works, for example. 

There are five grades of rings and amulets. Copper, Silver, Gold, Platinum,
and Adamantium. The more valuable the material, the higher level an imbued 
soul can reach. 

Level 2 - Copper
Level 3 - Silver
Level 4 - Gold
Level 5 - Platinum
Level 6 - Adamantium

In addition, Adamantium is immmune to being destroyed by
the elements. 

Currently, each monster letter has a soul type associated with it. This
means that the soul of a snotling gives the same benefits as that of a black
orc. Monster types that you encounter in the first few levels of the game
(icky things, kobolds, etc.) have fairly weak souls. When you dive a little
deeper, you hit the mid-range of souls (lesser demons, ogres, golems, etc.).
The mid-range souls are about twice as strong. In the depths of the dungeon,
you find the most dangerous monster types (greater demons, ancient dragons,
liches, etc.), who have the most powerful souls.

In addition, many monsters have a secondary soul type. If a monster has an
elemental attack, its soul will have bonuses related to that element. If
a monster has multiple elemental attacks, it's soul gem will be created
with an elemental sub-type chosen randomly from its attacks.

--
Original   : Chris Watkins
Updated    : 01/30/04