This is a basic guide to the magical spells and prayers in GW-Angband,
organized by realm and by spellbook.

Mage Spells
-----------

  An Introduction to Spellcasting
  -------------------------------
  This book contains copies of simple spells from several different schools
  of magic.  Recently graduated Mages always start with this book, which is
  intended to give them the resources necessary for basic survival until
  they can obtain the more specialized and powerful tomes.  All three of the
  magical classes (Mage, Ranger and Rogue) may learn all of the spells in
  this book, except Magic Missile (which Rogues may not learn).

  Magic Missile
    This spell throws a small burst of pure magical energy (or mana) which
    can be deadly against weak monsters.
  Detect Monsters
    This spell reveals the locations of nearby monsters.  It does not
    reveal any monsters which are invisible.
  Phase Door
    This spell opens a low-power gateway through space.  It allows the caster
    to traverse short distances nearly instantaneously; unfortunately, the
    destination is unpredictable.  (Note, however, that quantum laws
    prohibit the simultaneous occupancy of a single space by multiple
    physical objects, so the traveler will be perfectly safe.)
  Light Area
    This spell illuminates a room, or a small section of a corridor.
  Find Hidden Traps/Doors
    This spell reveals the locations of any nearby traps and doors (including
    secret doors).
  Cure Light Wounds
    This spell heals a small amount of physical damage (hit points).

  The Art of Divination
  ---------------------
  This book contains spells specialized for use in the gathering of
  information.  Mages survive best when they have the most knowledge
  they can possibly obtain, so that they can choose alternative courses
  of action without resorting to guesswork.  Only Rogues may learn the
  spells Detect Treasure and Detect Objects; all of the magical classes
  may learn all of the other spells in this book.

  Detect Monsters
    This spell reveals the locations of nearby monsters.  It does not
    reveal any monsters which are invisible.
  Find Hidden Traps/Doors
    This spell reveals the locations of any nearby traps and doors (including
    secret doors).
  Detect Treasure
    This spell reveals the locations of all nearby deposits of gold and other
    precious metals and gems.
  Detect Objects
    This spell revelas the locations of all nearby non-living objects, but
    not precious metals or gems.
  Identify
    This spell allows the caster to obtain basic information about the nature
    of a single object.  If the object has charges (e.g., a wand or staff),
    the caster will know how many it has.  If the object can be activated
    (e.g., some artifacts), then the object must be identified to learn how
    the activation is triggered.
  Detect Invisible
    This spell permits the caster to obtain a brief glimpse of the ethereal
    plane in the local vicinity.  Any monsters which hide their visible forms
    on this plane will become known to the caster.
  Detect Enchantment
    This spell reveals the locations of nearby objects which have been
    magically altered.

  Elementary Evocations
  ---------------------
  This is the favored magical school of the pure Mage, who cannot rely upon
  physical combat for self defense.  Mages and Rangers may learn all the
  spells in this book; Rogues may learn only Stinking Cloud, Confuse Monster,
  Sleep Monster and Wonder.

  Magic Missile
    This spell throws a small burst of pure magical energy (or mana) which
    can be deadly against weak monsters.
  Stinking Cloud
    This spell summons a small cloud poisonous gas at a point indicated by
    the caster.  Monsters caught in the cloud may be harmed or killed, but
    larger creatures are seldom incapacitated by this simple spell.
  Lightning Bolt
    This spell calls forth a burst of electrical energy which is useful for
    punishing monsters who foolishly line up in narrow corridors.
  Confuse Monster
    This spell temporarily clouds the mind of the target, rendering it
    unable to focus upon complex activities such as walking, fighting or
    casting spells.
  Sleep Monster
    This spell causes the target to fall asleep.
  Wonder
    This dangerous spell allows even novice casters to tap the planes of
    chaos and unleash the forces of wild magic.  The effects of this are
    unpredictable, but generally destructive.
  Frost Bolt
    This spell projects a magical field which, upon impact with living (or,
    in some cases, animated) flesh, causes molecular motion to stop briefly.
    The result of this is a deterioration of the body consistent with that
    of severe, prolonged exposure to chilling temperatures, but which occurs
    almost instantaneously.
  Acid Bolt
    This spell sprays highly corrosive fluid at a target chosen by the caster.
    The fluid is highly unstable, and thus will generally affect only the
    specific target chosen; by the time gravity would have brought the
    fluid to ground level, it has reverted to harmless water, leaving objects
    unharmed.
  Fire Bolt
    This spell shoots a superheated soft pellet at a specified target.  This
    pellet may stick to the target, causing severe burns, or it may burn its
    way through to affect others.

  Applied Conjuration
  -------------------
  The study of conjuration is rooted in the desire to shape the environment
  to better suit the caster's needs.  These spells allow the caster to
  either create, or move, or remove large objects.  Mages and Rangers may
  learn all the spells in this book; Rogues may learn all except Earthquake.

  Light Area
    This spell illuminates a room, or a small section of a corridor.
  Trap/Door Destruction
    This spell cleverly disintegrates the locking or triggering mechanisms
    in all of the commonly used locks and traps.  By focusing upon a very
    small piece of the larger structure, the spell remains effecient.
  Spear of Light
    This spell illuminates a long section of a corridor (or part of a room).
    It is useful for seeing areas at a distance without relying upon
    multiple castings of various Divination spells.  Also, many monsters
    who live underground are highly sensitive to bright light.
  Turn Stone to Mud
    This spell replaces (some) stone molecules in a region with water
    molecules; the resulting mixture is highly porous and easily removed.
    Also note that some magical creatures made of stone may be incapacitated
    or destroyed by this spell.
  Door Creation
    This spell surrounds the caster with a circular region of closed
    doorways.  The origin of this spell is not certain; it is suspected
    that it was devised by a Gnomish jester as a practical joke.  However,
    there are times when one wishes a bit of privacy....
  Earthquake
    This spell causes geological upheavals centered upon the ground beneath
    the caster's feet.  The surrounding terrain may be rearranged
    significantly, often to the dismay of creatures in the vicinity.
  Stair Creation
    This spell creates a physical stairway from the caster's vicinity to
    a region up to 50' away.  While this spell does not permit the caster
    to specify whether the stairs will ascend or descend, choosy casters
    may simply try again in another place....

  Anatomy and Physiology
  ----------------------
  This book is dedicated to the study of the caster's physical body.  While
  this not normally a chosen specialization for most magical practitioners,
  it contains some handy spells.  Mages may not learn Heroism or Berserker,
  because their studies are focused toward external effects rather than
  internal ones.

  Cure Light Wounds
    This spell heals a small amount of physical damage (hit points).
  Cure Poison
    This spell neutralizes the effects of toxins in the caster's bloodstream.
    (Hallucinogens are not affected.)
  Satisfy Hunger
    This spell conjures water and essential nutrients within the caster's
    body, alleviating the need for nourishment.
  Heroism
    This spell releases hormones which temporarily increase the efficiency
    with which the caster utilizes oxygen, food and other biological fuels.
    Under the influence of these hormones (also available over the counter),
    the caster fights and dodges more effectively, and the body's immune
    system is hardened against an additional amount of damage.  As a side
    effect, the caster's flight response is inhibited, making magical fear
    attacks ineffective.
  Berserker
    This spell releases hormones similar to those of the Heroism spell, but
    much more potent in their effects.  The caster becomes extremely good at
    fighting, but suffers from such a severe slowing of the flight response
    that normal dodging reflexes are impaired.  (These hormones are available
    only by prescription, or through illicit markets.)
  Haste Self
    This spell temporarily but dramatically increases the rate at which
    biological processes occur within the caster's body.  As a result,
    the caster will be able to act or react more quickly to external events.

  The Space-Time Continuum
  ------------------------
  This book is an introductory study of the most basic forces of physics and
  the universe in which we live.  It contains spells which are useful for
  transportation, and spells which give the caster an advantage by allowing
  her to move more quickly.  Although these spells require dedicated study,
  once mastered they are among the most useful.  All the magical schools
  may learn all the spells in this book.

  Phase Door
    This spell opens a low-power gateway through space.  It allows the caster
    to traverse short distances nearly instantaneously; unfortunately, the
    destination is unpredictable.  (Note, however, that quantum laws
    prohibit the simultaneous occupancy of a single space by multiple
    physical objects, so the traveler will be perfectly safe.)
  Teleport Self
    This spell opens a high-power gateway through space.  The caster may step
    through it, traversing longer distances nearly instantaneously.  As with
    Phase Door, however, there is no time to arrange for a specific
    destination before the gate destabilizes.
  Slow Monster
    This spell alters the local temporal field surrounding a creature chosen
    by the caster.  If the creature does not dodge aside in time, it will
    be encased in a relativistic reference frame which will cause time to pass
    more slowly for it than for the caster or other nearby creatures.
  Teleport Other
    This spell opens a high-power gateway through space, but along a line
    specified by the caster.  Creatures intersected by this line will be
    transported to unpredictable distant locations.
  Teleport Level
    This spell opens a high-power gateway through space, allowing the caster
    to move vertically (perpendicular to the surface of the earth).  The
    caster may end up at a higher altitude or at a lower altitude than
    before.  However, there are built-in safeguards which require the
    caster to end up between 1 and 3 inches above a horizontal stone surface.
  Word of Recall
    This spell opens an extremely-high-power gateway through space.  However,
    the spell takes the time to partially specify a destination.  A few
    minutes after the spell has been cast, the destination will have been
    completely codified, and the gateway will open, allowing the caster
    to traverse a distance of up to several thousand feet vertically.

  Grimoire of Black Magic
  -----------------------
  This book contains spells normally associated with "witchcraft" or
  "necromancy".  These spells generally affect the mind or soul of
  a creature, and are quite difficult to master.  In some cases, the
  target creature may not be affected; the mind naturally resists such
  interference, and the stronger the creature (relative to the caster),
  the less likely it is that the spell will succeed.

  Polymorph Other
    This spell attempts to transform a creature into a different species
    (which may not necessarily be an improvement from the caster's point
    of view).
  Shock Wave
    This spell allows the caster to create a burst of sound at a distance.
    The resulting damage is not great, but this often stuns monsters.
  Explosion
    With this spell, the caster conjures thousands of bits of rock from his
    surroundings and places them in a state of compression some distance away.
    The compression is released, and the shards fly outward in all directions,
    ripping apart anything in their path.
  Cloudkill
    This spell is a more powerful version of Stinking Cloud.
  Mass Sleep
    This spell causes all nearby creatures to fall asleep.
  Bedlam
    This spell creates a large psychomagical field over a region specified
    by the caster.  Creatures within the field may become confused (as per
    Confuse Monster).  The effect is strongest near the center of the region.
  Rend Soul
    This spell is the favorite of great necromancers.  The caster opens a
    channel between the nether planes and her victim; the result is
    exceedingly unpleasant and often messy.
  Word of Destruction
    This spell unleashes a powerful wave of force centered upon the caster.
    Any creatures or objects caught in the wave are instantly destroyed.
    The surrounding terrain is often unrecognizable afterward.
  Chaos Strike
    The caster invoking this spell hurls a small piece of the primordial
    chaos.  This chaos is unstable in our universe, and quickly transforms
    into more ordered substances, but anything struck by this chaos will
    be subject to its destructive nature.  Chaos has been known to warp
    the mind and body.

  Ethereal Armor
  --------------
  Most of the spells in this realm focus on the creation of fields of
  energy centered upon the caster.  In the case of Rune of Protection,
  the field is centered upon a physical diagram drawn upon the ground or
  other flat surface.  These spells often draw their power from other
  planes of existence.

  Resist Cold
    This spell sets up a magical aura about the caster's body which
    insulates her against magical freezing effects.
  Resist Fire
    This spell sets up a magical aura about the caster's body which
    insulates her against extreme heat.
  Resist Poison
    This spell creates a chemomagical aura around the caster which causes
    toxic substances to be partially neutralized upon contact.  This
    dramatically reduces the effectivess of poisonous gases used against
    the caster.
  Resistance
    This spell sets up multiple independent magical auras around the
    caster.  There are five distinct subspells which are all activated
    simultaneously (but which may terminate independently) -- one each
    for protection against cold, fire, electricity, acid and poison.
  Shield
    This spell creates a hard but flexible "second skin" around the caster.
    This magical defense will deflect or absorb many blows taken in combat.
  Rune of Protection
    This spell allows the caster to draw a weak but functional pentagram upon
    the ground.  Creatures other than the caster are unable to step upon the
    pentagram without first breaking it (which is possible for strong
    creatures).  Note, however, that this pentagram protects only the floor;
    creatures may still attack the caster while she is standing in the
    pentagram....

  Energy Transference
  -------------------
  This realm is favored by the Craftsman-Mage, for it allows the caster to
  imbue physical objects with permanent magical abilities.  These spells
  are among the most demanding; in fact, the typical Mage will forego many
  of these, preferring to study a broader selection of realms rather than
  dedicating the time to master this one.

  Lesser Recharging
    This spell attempts to store magical energy in a device (a wand, staff
    or rod) which uses such energy.  This spell utilizes only small amounts
    of energy and does not contain a full set of safeguards; for best
    results, the device being charged should be fully (or almost fully)
    discharged.  This spell should not be used on valuable or complex
    magical devices.
  Enchant Armor
    This spell draws from the realm of field theory.  It lets the caster
    imbue an object (typically a shield or other piece of armor) with a
    field which suppresses a small amount of inertial energy on one side.
    As a result, incoming blows are slowed slightly, allowing the bearer
    a chance to dodge; and if the blow still lands, it does less damage.
    ("Enchanted" armor is highly prized by professional soldiers and by
    paranoid nobility.  Many Mages who choose to dedicate their time to
    the study of this realm find they can make a modest, if tedious,
    living by the resale of "enchanted" items.)
  Enchant Weapon
    This spell is the natural counterpart to Enchant Armor.  It allows the
    caster to imbue a small object (often a sword) with a field which
    weakens molecular bonds at very short range, on one side of the field.
    An object so enhanced will cut through living tissue or armor more
    easily, giving the bearer a distinct advantage in combat.  ("Enchanted"
    weaponry is in great demand by professional soldiers and by assassins,
    for obvious reasons.  As with Enchant Armor, the resale of such items
    can provide a reasonable income.)
  Greater Recharging
    Like Lesser Recharging, this spell replenishes the spent magical energy
    in a device.  However, this spell utilizes much greater amounts of
    energy, and contains a wider range of safeguards.  It can handle more
    complex devices safely -- or at least, somewhat more safely....
  Elemental Brand
    This spell allows a caster of moderate skill to create a permanent
    elemental field on a very small area, such as the head of an arrow.  In
    order to be suitable for non-masters, this spell does not allow the
    caster to focus on a particular element; rather, the caster simply
    wills an elemental force to comply, and the first element which
    responds is the one which is branded onto the area.  (Note that
    because of their studies of toxins, Rogues will always receive a
    response from the elements of poison.)

  Tome of Destruction
  -------------------
  This book contains the most fearsome and potent of all the magical spells
  known.  These spells are exceedingly difficult to master and dangerous to
  employ....

  Frost Ball
    This spell creates a region in which molecular motion is suppressed.
    Creatures and liquids caught in this region are frozen.  Liquids stored
    in glass containers will expand, causing their containers to shatter.
  Acid Ball
    This spell conjures a ball of highly corrosive fluid in a region specified
    by the caster.  Living flesh and many types of objects will be dissolved.
  Fire Ball
    This spell conjures a flammable gas (usually hydrogen) in a region
    specified by the caster, and ignites it.  Creatures and objects caught
    in the region may be burned quite severely.
  Ice Storm
    This spell lowers the temperature of a region specified by the caster,
    and also sends water through the region at high velocity.  The water
    is frozen into ice, which pounds the frozen flesh of creatures caught
    in the region.  Blows to the head may cause temporary incapacitation
    of creatures who survive.
  Genocide
    This spell kills all the creatures of a specific genus on the current
    dungeon level.  It draws power from the caster's body; caution must be
    exercised before using this spell on common monsters, because the spell
    might completely drain the caster's life.
  Meteor Swarm
    This spell conjures superheated chunks of iron and rock and directs
    them toward a target specified by the caster.  These projectiles pummel
    hapless creature in their path, and may burn objects on the ground.
  Mass Genocide
    This spell kills all creatures near the caster, without regard for the
    creature's genus or species.  Like Genocide, this spell draws upon
    the caster's body for power; it may be fatal to the caster if there are
    many creatures nearby.
  Rift
    Powerful casters may temporarily fold the planes of space along a
    line.  Anything caught on this line will be torn apart by extreme
    gravitational forces as the planes unfold themselves.  Creatures which
    dodge to one side of the rift may survive, but will often be carried a
    short distance by the unfolding planes.
  Mana Storm
    This spell creates a burst of pure magical energy in a region chosen
    by the caster.  Any creature within the region will be seared, often
    killed.

Priest Prayers
--------------

  Visions
  -------
  This book contains prayers which lead one to a fuller understanding of
  one's place in the gods' creation.  Through meditation and prayer,
  enlightenment may be achieved.

  Detect Evil
    The unholy cannot be tolerated; the gods take offense at them and
    willingly guide those who would seek to end their reign.
  Call Light
    It is truly said that those who are strong in their faith need never
    wander in the darkness.
  Find Traps
    Trickery is anathema to the righteous; such deceptions may fool those
    who are not pure in their faith, but the true children of the gods
    need not fear in strange places.
  Detect Doors/Stairs
    The portal is the interface between the present and the future.  The
    gods guide our steps as we pass through life toward our destinies.
  Sense Invisible
    The eyes of the gods are all-knowing and all-seeing.  Foul creatures
    who would hide from them will be revealed.
  Sense Surroundings
    All of creation is contained within the smallest seed.  Those who
    meditate upon this basic truth may glimpse a portion of creation,
    reflected from within.

  Lesser Healings
  ---------------
  The gods comfort those who are ill.  For though the flesh may be weak,
  the spirit is strong; through prayer, the body may be rebuilt in the
  image of the divine spirit which is within us all.

  Cure Light Wounds
    The power of healing begins with this simple mantra.  For it is said
    that even the longest journey begins with a single step.
  Remove Fear
    The righteous do not fear the wicked; for the power of the gods moves
    us, and we shall be victorious.
  Neutralize Poison
    By acknowledging our sins, and praying for forgiveness, we come closer
    to the purity of the gods.
  Cure Mortal Wounds
    As one's faith grows stronger, one is able to transform the body into
    a closer reflection of the divine.  For we are created in the image of
    the gods, and this knowledge will sustain us through our trials in this
    life.
  Regneration
    The gods help those who help themselves, and a drop of prevention is
    worth a river of undoing.  By meditating upon the divine spirit, the
    faithful may strengthen their own spirit, as well as their bodies.

  The Heavenly Host
  -----------------
  It is written that in the final days of the world, the legions of darkness
  will attempt to wrest control of creation from the servants of the gods.
  In preparation for the final conflict, the righteous pray for strength
  and courage; in togetherness we may yet prevail.

  Bless
    With courage in our hearts, we beseech the gods for their aid as we
    fight in their name.  Our aim shall be true, and our enemies will
    falter.
  Orb of Draining
    The true power of the gods is shown through their ability to expunge
    the forces corruption and evil from their creation.  As the gods' agents,
    the righteous wield the holy light; and the light shall erase the
    darkness.
  Radiant Aura
    The righteous wear the power of the gods as a cloak.  It is said that
    evil must cower in the darkness; it cannot withstand the light of the
    gods' love.
  Exorcise
    The servants of the darkness sometimes intrude upon the gods' creation
    directly, or through mortal agents who violate the sacred mysteries of
    life and death.  These abominations are not within the gods' plan.  As
    servants of the light, we wield the righteous power to return them to
    the pits whence they came.
  Earthquake
    The power of the gods is supreme; all of creation is within their grasp.
    Should the need arise, the servants of the gods may humbly ask that
    the world tremble with righteous fury.

  The Hand of Mercy
  -----------------
  The gods are merciful; they wish their creation to exist in peace and
  harmony.  Conflict between their servants is a thing to be avoided
  wherever possible.  By prayer, we may overcome violence without violence.

  Turn Undead
    When the servants of the darkness profane the sacred mysteries of life
    and death, the abominations they create are weak.  They cower from the
    light of the gods.
  Scare Monster
    The creatures which inhabit the gods' creation all share a piece of the
    divine spirit.  In those who are not strong in their faith, feelings of
    aggression (the work of the hand of the darkness) may sometimes
    temporarily overcome the natural tendency for harmony.  At such times,
    the mind is in a weakened state (it is not in tune with the gods'
    creation), and through the shared piece of the divine spirit, the
    primitive emotions be channeled into less destructive alternatives.
  Sanctuary
    The mortal flesh is weak and requires rest after its labors.  This is
    particularly true when the spirit is also weak, as when a creature has
    been tricked into the service of the darkness.  Through the shared piece
    of the divine spirit, the righteous may call upon the spirit of another
    and so bring peace.
  Teleport Other
    It is written: "When a child is naughty, do you kill it?  Nay, the peace
    of the gods is our greatest power; those who cannot coexist with us in
    harmony must be sent to a place where they will not cause further harm."
  Banishment
    When beset by the legions of darkness, the wise may seek to disperse
    them.  Through the contemplation of the divine harmony, the righteous
    may call upon the gods to scatter the wicked, like dust in the wind.

  The Clerical Handbook
  ---------------------
  Often, the children of the gods are called upon to service in strange
  and distant lands.  As part of the preparation for such journeys, these
  prayers may help one to cope with the unexpected.

  Call Light
    It is truly said that those who are strong in their faith need never
    wander in the darkness.
  Satisfy Hunger
    The gods smile upon their creation; the righteous need never know
    famine, for the gods shall send divine manna to the needy.
  Remove Curse
    The servants of the darkness often befoul creation.  Through prayer,
    the righteous may cleanse the world to bring it back into its natural
    attunement to the divine.
  Unbarring Ways
    The quest for righteousness is often a struggle.  When the servants
    of the darkness erect barriers in the path of the holy, the power of
    prayer may overcome them.
  Recharging
    Often when traveling far from the flock, the lone servant of the gods
    may find the tools of the secular magi to be of some benefit.  When
    used in the name of righteousness, such trinkets may be replenished
    by divine energy (although the holy spirit is often too strong for
    these intrinsically flawed vessels).
  Dispel Curse
    The strongest servants of the darkness often befoul creation so cruelly
    that only the most dedicated prayers and rituals will suffice to
    return the world to its pristine purity.

  Ethereal Openings
  -----------------
  All of creation is contained within the mind of the gods.  There is a
  single pervasive, unifying harmony which runs throughout the world and
  connects all parts of it together.  Through attunement to the will of
  the gods and to the divine spirit, the righteous may surpass the
  superficial physical layers of their surroundings, and move where the
  gods will.

  Portal
    In the struggle against the forces of evil, the children of the gods
    may sometimes find themselves in a place where their mortal flesh is
    endangered.  The wise may seek shelter, and a chance for prayer,
    before rejoining the battle.
  Teleport Self
    Some of the servants of the darkness are sufficiently strong or numerous
    that a greater distance is required in order to provide adequate time
    for preparation.
  Teleport Level
    At times the legions of darkness may so fully inhabit a place that
    the lone servant of the gods cannot prevail.  There is no shame in
    retreat; it is better to survive to report such places so that they
    may be cleansed by an effort of many children of the gods working
    together.
  Blink
    In the battle against evil, the righteous may find it useful to move
    only a small distance; for, even as the servant of the gods is
    planning and preparing, so may the servant of evil.
  Word of Recall
    It is written: "Would you walk to the market when you a horse is
    willing to carry you?  It is not shameful to seek shortcuts; for by
    eliminating unnecessary tedium, we free ourselves for the greater
    work of the gods."
  Alter Reality
    The creation of the gods is an ongoing process.  When a small part of
    it is flawed beyond repair, the gods may intervene.  A tiny region
    of the tapestry of the universe may be removed and rewoven.

  Godly Insights
  --------------
  It is truly said that the gods know all.  As mere reflections of the
  divine image, we are not able to encompass all knowledge; but through
  meditation we may expand our knowledge of the world around us.  For
  a brief moment, we may see through the eyes of our creators.

  Detection
    This prayer guides the mind and spirit of the faithful; when the eyes
    of the flesh are closed, the eyes of the soul may be opened.
  Perception
    As vessels for our piece of the divine spirit, our bodies interact
    with the physical world and the objects therein.  But in order to
    truly see a thing, we must pray; only through attunement to the divine
    may we learn all the aspects which are hidden to our mortal eyes.
  Probing
    The creatures of the gods' creation are plentiful and often strange.
    Through prayer, the wise may seek insight; through understanding,
    the wise may seek harmony.
  Clairyovance
    Those who are strongest in their faith may remain attuned to the divine
    spirit for longer periods of time, gaining a greater understanding of
    the creation.

  Spiritual Armor
  ---------------
  The mortal flesh is merely the vessel for the holy spirit.  When the
  spirit is attuned to the divine through meditation, it is possible for
  the spirit to temporarily overcome the limitations of the body.  In this
  way, the righteous may strengthen themselves for the trials ahead.

  Resist Heat and Cold
    The gods' creation is filled with energy; the body exists within a
    small range of temperatures.  Through prayer, one may balance the energy
    flow of the universe through one's flesh.
  Protection from Evil
    Through attunement to the gods, the righteous may erect a protective
    barrier around the body.  The forces of darkness cannot surpass this
    barrier so long as it is held in place.  (The stronger one's faith,
    the stronger the barrier.)
  Resist Poison
    The purity of the gods, and their love for their creation, allows the
    faithful to overcome the foulness of the servants of the darkness.
  Holy Sight
    Though mortal eyes may fail, the eyes of the spirit can never be closed
    so long as one's faith is strong.
  Clear Consciousness
    The servants of evil may attempt to deceive and confuse the faithful.
    But through meditation upon the divine spirit, the children of the gods
    may turn aside from such petty trickery.
  Resist Elements
    As one advances in one's attunement to the divine spirit, one's
    understanding of the energy flows of the universe grows.  Through
    disciplined meditation and faith, the one may balance the flow of
    different forms of energy and certain harmful substances in order to
    protect oneself.
  Sacred Shield
    Through faith, the righteous may erect a physical barrier which protects
    against attacks directed at the flesh.

  Purifications and Healings
  --------------------------
  The divine spirit within us is a reflection of the gods themselves; by
  meditating upon this knowledge, the faithful may bring their bodies and
  minds into attunement with this perfection.

  Healing
    Injury of the flesh may be reversed by those whose faith is strong.
  Purify Body
    The flesh is subject to certain ailments and temporary disabilities.
    However, the faithful know that the power of the divine spirit may
    overcome such conditions.
  Meditation
    Through prayer, one may bring one's mind and spirit back into a state
    of attunement to the divine spirit which unites us.
  Restoration
    This complex ritual restores both the mind and the body.
  Remembrance
    The abominations created by the forces of darkness may sometimes
    temporarily corrupt the souls of the faithful, bringing doubt of one's
    own abilities.  Through ritual and prayer, those of the strongest faith
    may overcome this, and reattune their spirits in accordance with the
    will of the gods.

  Wrath of God
  ------------
  It is written that in the final days of the world, the battle between
  the forces of the gods and the servants of the darkness will plunge the
  gods' creation into turmoil.  It is also written that there may come a
  hero -- a true child of the gods, strong in faith and righteousness --
  who will overcome the strongest of the servants of evil.

  Dispel Undead
    The abominations created by the servants of the darkness tremble before
    the righteous anger of the gods whose creation they defile.
  Dispel Demons
    Some of the forces of evil may penetrate the barrier between the gods'
    creation and the realms of the underworld, traveling to our world for
    purposes of savage destruction.  The righteous shall not permit such
    intrusions.
  Dispel Evil
    Whenever a creature is touched by unholiness, it is stained forever.
    The mark of evil shall be a calling to the righteous, who shall smite
    the wicked.
  Bless Weapon
    Through this ritual, the righteous may consecrate a blade to the service
    of the gods and their battle against the forces of darkness.
  Holy Word
    As children of the gods, we bear a small piece of them within ourselves.
    Certain symbols within our consciousness -- images, sounds, words --
    resonate with the power of the gods themselves.  In times of direst need,
    those who are strongest in their faith and righteousness may call upon
    this inner reflection of the gods to unleash -- briefly -- the full
    wrath as well as the full love of the gods.
  Annihilation
    It is written: "And the beast arose, and bellowed forth a battle cry.
    And the stone around it shook with the force of its unholy power, and
    the trees were ripped from the earth.  And the angel of the gods did
    call upon the holy ones; and through him the gods delivered a mighty
    ray of blessed light, which severed the head of the beast."
  Word of Destruction
    When evil desecrates the creation of the gods, their anger grows.
    The most powerful of the righteous may serve as foci to direct the
    divine wrath to destroy the evil where it stands, and to cleanse the
    places and things which evil has touched.
