=== Character Statistics and Skills ===

This file describes your character.  It discusses the attributes shown on 
the left side of the main window, the basic skills characters possess, and the 
various special immunities and qualities that characters may acquire in their 
adventures.  It also tells you how to keep track of all this information.

=== Character Attributes Shown on the Left Side of the Main Window ===
     
Level:        Your character's level.  It reflects how powerful you are; level
              1 is a beginning character, while level 50 is the maximum you can
              reach.
Next:         The amount of experience necessary for the next level.  
              Experience affects almost everything else about your character.  
              As he kills monsters, casts spells and prays prayers for the 
              first time, learns about an object kind by using it, disarms 
              traps, and unlocks doors.
AU:           Represents your current gold supply. Gold is amazingly handy, 
              because everything the town can sell can be yours with enough of 
              the stuff.  
Vital Statistics (STR, INT, WIS, DEX, CON and CHR):
              Your character has six primary statistics, or stats. The lowest 
              any stat can go is 0, a level which greatly reduces any abilities
              that stat influences. The lowest "safe" figure for most stats is
              4, but you can't expect any significant bonuses until the stat
              reaches 15 or higher. The highest a stat can rise without 
              equipment or race bonuses is 20. More information on individual 
              stats is available below.
AC:           Armor class helps prevent you getting killed.  It may be 
              increased by equipping more and better armor, and by increasing 
              your Dexterity.  
HP:           Each character has hit points, representing how much damage he 
              can sustain before he suffers a permanent wound or, if he already
              has the same wound, dies. The maximum number of hit points is
              derived from race, class, level, and constitution. Hit points may
              be regained by resting, or by a variety of magical means. Once
              your character suffers a permanent wound, adrenalin surge heals
              him to 50 % of maximum hitpoints and cures all poison, cuts,
              stunning, confusion, blindness, and slowing. 
SP:           Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how 
              many spells a character can cast (or tunes he can play). Mana may
              be regained by resting or some rare magical means.
Lore:         You may use Lore points to use many proficiencies. They refresh
              every time you take the stairs down.
Reserves:     You may use Reserves to use the proficiency Recover. Recover
              restores hitpoints and cures many status effects. Reserves points
              refresh every time you take the stairs down.
Escapes:      You may spend Escapes to use the proficiency Shift, which is
              directed teleportation. Escapes points refresh every time you
              take the stairs down.


=== Stats ===

Strength:     Strength is critical to fighting effectively in melee and with 
              missile weapons. Increases in Strength allow you to use heavier
              weapons, and make you more likely to hit through armor.  Strength
              is useful in tunneling and for carrying heavy items without being
              slowed down. Strong character may also throw objects longer
              distances, and very strong characters gain double or triple
              damage with thrown weapons.
Intelligence: Intelligence represents the character's ability in logic and
              language. It affects the spellcasting abilities of mages, as well
              as spellswords, rangers and mystics. For these classes, this stat
              will affect the number of spells they may learn each level, the
              number of spell points they receive, and the chance for spells to
              fail. Intelligent characters are better mappers, and they also
              mix potions, pick locks and disarm traps more effectively.
              Intelligence and Wisdom together determine your Lore points. They
              are used to identify objects or to gather information about your
              surroundings.
Wisdom:       Wise character are at peace with the world, full of common sense,
              and always aware of their surroundings. Wisdom affects the
              spellcasting abilities of priests, paladins, and mystics. For
              these classes, this stat will affect the number of spells they may
              learn each level, the number of spell points  they receive, and
              the chance for spells to fail. Wise characters also have a good
              perception, and have a better chance of resisting magical spells
              cast upon them by monsters. Wisdom and Intelligence together
              determine your Lore points.
Dexterity:    Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness.  A high 
              dexterity may allow a character to get multiple blows with 
              lighter weapons, and will significantly increase his chances of 
              hitting with any weapon and dodging blows from enemies. Dexterity
              is also useful in picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting 
              yourself from some of the thieves that inhabit the dungeon.
Constitution: Constitution is a character's ability to resist damage to his 
              body, and to recover from stuns, poison, disease, cuts, and pure
              damage. Therefore a character with a high constitution will 
              receive more hit points and also recover them faster while 
              resting.
Charisma:     Charisma is more than just appearances and personality. It also
              represents the character's metaphysical presence, his "aura". It
              affects the spellcasting abilities of bards, affecting the number
              of spell points they receive and the chance of their tunes
              failing. Charismatic characters are very good with magical
              devices, and they get better range with spells and devices. They
              will also receive better prices from store owners, whereas a
              character with a very low charisma may be robbed blind. Finally,
              a high charisma will allow monsters that are magically calmed to
              remain non-aggressive longer.


=== Skills ===

Characters possess various abilities which help them to survive and prosper.  
The starting abilities of a character are based upon race and class. Abilities 
may be adjusted by high or low stats, and some increase with experience level.

Saving Throw: A Saving Throw is the ability of a character to resist the 
              effects of a spell cast on him by another person/creature. This 
              does not include spells cast on the player by his own stupidity,
              such as quaffing a nasty potion.  
Stealth:      The ability to move silently about is very useful.  Characters
              with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents, gaining 
              the first blow.  Also, creatures may fail to notice a stealthy 
              character entirely.
Fighting:     Melee (hand to hand) combat depends on this skill.  A character
              with a low fighting skill cannot hope to either hit monsters 
              often or do much damage if he does.  
Shooting:     Using ranged missile weapons depends on this skill.  The higher 
              the character's shooting ability, the more frequently he will 
              hit his targets and the more damage he will do when he does.  
Throwing:     Using thrown weapons depends on this skill.  The higher your
              character's throwing ability, the more frequently he will hit 
              his target.  
Disarming:    Disarming is the ability to safely remove traps and pick locks on 
              chests and doors. A trap must be found before it can be disarmed.
Magic Device: The chance of succesfully using a magical device such as a wand,
              staff, or any activatable object depends on this skill.
Perception:   Perception affects your chances of finding traps and secret
              doors. You will automatically keep watch for traps, and you get
              only get one chance to detect them. In comparison, you usually
              have to actively look for secret doors, and use the (s)earch
              command many times. High perception also sometimes lets you
              "hear" nearby monsters. Perception skill helps when you use the
              proficiency Analyse Item to fully identify any non-potions.
Digging:      Digging is a tedious art, but characters with a higher skill
              may do it much faster than others. 
Alchemy:      Mixing potions is a hazardous art, and without a high alchemy 
              skill it is likely to cause accidental explosions or no effect
              at all.  Characters who excel in alchemy may learn alchemical 
              formulae by simply quaffing potions.  Alchemy skill helps when
              you use the proficiency Analyse Item to find out alchemical
              information about potions.
Mapping:      Mapping is a very useful skill in the depths of Angband. If you
              succeed in mapping your path to the depths, you get to begin a new
              dungeon level standing on a stairway leading back to surface.
              In addition, characters with a high mapping skill carry a
              collection of old dungeon maps with them. If you follow a map to
              a dungeon level, you start with the level partially mapped.

=== Other abilities ===

Infra-vision: Infra-vision is the ability to see heat sources.  It will allow 
              a character to see any warm-blooded creature up to a certain 
              distance. This ability works equally well with or without a light
              source.  Several of the playable races have innate infravision.

Racial Ab.:   Angels and Demons, being more magical than the other races, may
              have access to special, innate, magical spells.  These can be 
              activated by the 'U' command, and need some time to recharge.

Wounds:       Your character may have three kinds of wounds: VIGOR, WIT, and
              GRACE. Each wound hurts two of your abilities. If your character
              doesn't have an ability sustained at the time of being wounded,
              one point of ability damage is reduced from the racial bonus. This
              is truly permanent damage. If your character ever suffers the same
              wound again, she instantly dies. Half-faery races have a 50%
              chance of dying when they receive any wound because of their more
              fragile constitution. Angels and Demons have a 25 % chance of
              getting banished when they are wounded.


====================== Last updated for FayAngband 1.1.0 ======================
