=== Statistic FAQ ===
Q:*What* exactly in the heck is going on with all these whacky stats?

A:Muscle, Agility, Vigor, Schooling, Ego, and Charm all map in a very
standard way to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom
and Charisma. The short descriptions of the above stats are MUS, AGI,
VIG, SCH, EGO, and CHR.


Q:I meant the numbers.

A:Oh, well then. Each stat is graded on a value from 1 through 999.
700 happens to be the natural maximum, but the stat can go higher
then that using equipment and skills (which are applied to the base
stat).


Q:What's a 'good' stat?

A: Good stats for starting characters are ~180 range. Less than 100
is bad, and 300-400 are good. Anything above that is great. 


Q:How do these compare to stats in other bands.

A:Each equipment bonus to a stat provides a 10 point bonus. So
a +4 bonus to Muscle is equal to 40 additional muscle. Every 
30-40 points in a stat equates to about a one point difference in
a normal *band. 


Q:Wait a second, doesn't that mean equipment bonuses will be low?

A:No, bonuses on equipment overall tend to be higher making them
about equivalent to the bonuses on normal *band equipment.


Q:Hey, if 30-40 points is equilivant to a normal stat point in
a *band, doesn't this mean that your starting score of 180 is 
equal to a starting strength of 5 or 6?

A:No, because the *bands use a table lookup which basically groups
80% of the stat in the same range. The changeover has compensated for
this.


Q:What's with this 'statgrowth' thing?

A:Instead of having a long period of the game devoted to 'maxing'
out your stats, every time you gain a level you gain a statgrowth
point. Spending one of these points causes all of your stats to 
increase. 


Q:No, no, on the character creation screen there's this statgrowth
thing.

A:Oh. Every race has a base value for a stat, and every class has
a base value for a stat. *Every* time these stats are raised they
increase a random amount between 1 and (the racial growth factor +
the class growth factor).


Q:I must not be communicating clearly today. I do not understand
how to 'grow' my stats.

A:Go to the skill screen - 'G', and there you will see instructions
at the bottom. (hint: push 'g'.)


Q:Hey! I gained a level and i didn't gain a statgrowth point! Why
not?

A: It is rarely possible to gain either 0, 2, or 3 stat growth points
on level gain.


Q:I didn't gain a level and I've got a stat growth point. What happened?

A:Sometimes when you return a book to the library you will be rewarded
with a statgrowth point in addition to skill points.


Q:It is ever to my advantage to hold off gaining stats?

A:Very very rarely. Stats always grow when you use the points, but if a 
stat is drained, you won't see the effect until it is restored. Some classes
(noteably Dashing Hussars and Naturalists) have skills that increase the 
amount a stat increases. And it is to your advantage to wait on gaining stats
if you are raising those skills. However, if you don't gain your stats some
it will be very difficult to continue to survive. And remember the natural 
maximum of a stat is 700.


Q:If I use mutiple stat gains all at once, I get larger increases right?

A:No. The stat totals shown at character creation are constant, and only
affected in the game by a small subset of skills. The game picks a random
number between 1 and that value (which never changes excepting those skills)
and that is your increase. There are no other factors involved.


Q:So if I don't have any of those skills I can raise my stats as soon as I
level, without penalty?

A:Yes. And you are advised to do so.


Q:What are the skills? 

A:That's spoiler information, but in a general sense certain elemental
lores, and the heart of a certain mythical animal in the Naturalist's 
and Dashing Hussar's case respectively.


Q:What is with the highlighted stat during character creation?

A:Depending on what class you select, this is the stat that is used
to calculate this classes spellpoints.
