	When you load the game, select "Start a new character." Go through the
step-by-step instructions for picking a gender, race, and class. For
your first time, I recommend choosing either a Half-Troll or Dunedain
Warrior. Avoid the magely/priestly types; they're much more difficult to
play.
	After naming your character, you'll start in the town. The various
numbers represent stores, where you can buy new equipment and sell stuff
you've found in the dungeon. The little ">" is a staircase, the entrance
to the dungeon. If you want to know what a specific symbol stands for,
type /, and then the symbol. For instance, if you're wondering what all
the #'s are, type /#, and the game will tell you that these are walls.
Take a look around the town, but avoid the Mean-Looking Mercenaries and
Battle-Scarred Veterans; they can kill you fairly easily. (If you have
trouble moving around, type "?" (minus quotes) and read the instructions
on commands.) A note on shop #7; it's the black market, where very
powerful items are sold for an absolutely ridiculous price.
	Be sure to visit shops #1 and #2, the General Store and Armoury,
respectively. At the General Store, buy a cloak and a Brass Lantern, and
a flask of oil or two. Sell your torches. At the Armoury, buy some of
the light armor. Suggested: Hard Leather Boots, a Leather Cap, Leather
Gloves. If a Small Leather Shield is on sale and you can afford it, buy
it.
	This should have cleaned out your money. However, if it hasn't, it is
strongly recommended that you go to the Alchemist's shop (#5) and
purchase a scroll of Phase Door. If you get surrounded by monsters, read
it, and you'll be teleported a short distance away.  
	Angband's not actually all that difficult to learn to play. You should
get the hang of it fairly quickly.

	More Advanced Stuff:
	On weapons and multiple blows:
	When you start a new character that is a fighter type (warrior,
paladin, ranger, or rogue), you have the possibility of getting more
than one attack with your weapon. Whether or not you get multiple blows
is determined by your weapon weight, your Strength, and your Dexterity.
If you can get a high enough Strength and Dexterity (both over 18; use
the autoroller), then sell your original weapon, and buy something
light, like a Whip. Check your Character display (type "C"). Somewhere
on this page, there is a number that is your number of blows/round.
Hopefully, this will be above 1.
	Multiple blows become very important later in the dungeon. The more
times you hit, the more damage your weapon does (obviously). What is not
so obvious is the fact that at multiple blows, your magical enchantments
to damage kick in many more times than with just one blow (see the
section on the meaning of the numbers in your equipment). If you have,
say, 4 attacks with a Whip, that is 4*(1d6) base damage, AND 4* your
+to-dam. What this means is, GET MULTIPLE ATTACKS!

	On important magical items:
	You might think that you can get by without magical items. If so,
you're bound for an interesting, but short, stay in the dungeon. It'll
probably be one-way, too.
	The most important items to have are of teleportation. There are two types
of teleportation items: Phase Door and Teleport. The former teleports
you a short distance away, and is useful for escaping in battle when you
want to stay somewhat close to your enemy (and is the basis for the
Shoot'n Scoot maneuver; more on this later). The latter will teleport
you across the dungeon. This has the unfortunate effect of sometimes
landing you next to an angry monster, but it's better than certain
death. Once you get to about level 10, be sure you always have several
(at least 10) Scrolls of Phase Door. After about level 15, carry
Teleportation scrolls/staves. This are harder to get, because the
Alchemist (shop #5) doesn't carry them, but you can sometimes find them
in the Black Market.
	The second most important items are those of healing. Healing, in this
case, covers Cure Light/Serious/Critical Wounds, Healing, *Healing*, and
Life Potions, from weakest to strongest.
	Cure Light Wounds is almost useless; monsters will generally do more
damage than it heals; leaving you worse off than before. In general, the
Cure potions are not used so much for their healing abilities as their
abilities to remove bad effects like poison and confusion. About the
time you start carrying Phase Door scrolls, start carrying Cure Serious
Wounds. In fairly short order, you'll be wanting Cure Critical Wounds.
Use either of them whenever you get confused or have a bleeding wound
that's slowly killing you. They also cure poison.
	Potions of Healing, *Healing*, and Life you won't see for quite some
time. Healing restores 300 HPs, and removes all temporary bad effects,
except possibly for fear. *Healing* does the same, except it restores
1000 HPs. Potions of Life fix almost everything wrong with you; they
restore 5000 HP, restore all drained stats, restore experience, and remove
every bad temporary effect you have.
	There are various methods of Identify which you *need*. Identify comes
in the form of scrolls, Staffs of Perception, Rods of Perception, the
spell Identify, and the prayer Perception. These will tell you any
magical properties of the item, like magical bonuses to hit and to
damage, and magical bonuses to stats. It also tells you if the item is
cursed. It tells you what a wand/rod/staff/potion/scroll/mushroom/etc.
does, and this is very important. There are nasty potions deep in the
dungeon that you *do not* want to drink! There is also an advanced form
of Identify, in scroll form only, called *Identify*. It tells you every
single property of an item, like whether or not it lets you see
invisible monsters, sustains stats, gives you regeneration, and so on.
You should only use these on artifacts or the high-level ego-items
(Westernesse, Holy Avenger, Defender, Elvinkind).
	Notes on lighting: You can't do much without light. You won't be able
to see most monsters, cast spells or read scrolls, or, in general, see
the dungeon. There are items which will light up the dungeon, but only
parts of it. Any item/spell of Light or Illumination will light up the
room you are standing it (or part of the corridor). A potion of
Enlightenment/ the prayer Clairvoyance will light up the entire level.
	Finally, the most useful magical item in general is a Scroll of
Word-of-Recall (often abbreviated WoR). When you are in the town and
read it, you are teleported to the lowest level you have been to in the
dungeon. When read in the dungeon, you are teleported to the town. The
activation takes place about 50 turns after reading the scroll, so it's
not a perfect escape method.

	On the Maximise/Preserve modes:
	These are selected on or off at character creation, and cannot be
changed after that.
	Maximise mode: normally, your statistics max out at 18/100, without
outside magical effects, like a Ring of Strength. When Maximise mode is
on, where your stats max out at is determined by your race and class.
For instance, any Mage has -5 to Strength. A Human Mage's strength
(Humans have no racial stat differences), therefore, will max out at
18/50, instead of 18/100. However, Mages also have +3 to Intelligence. A
Human Mage's Intelligence will max out at 18/130.
	Preserve mode: normally, if a level is created with an artifact on it,
and you don't get that artifact, it is gone forever. When Preserve mode
is on, you always can find the artifact again. However, you lose the
"special" level feeling (more below).

	On Level Feelings:
	When you enter a level, you recieve a feeling giving you a vague idea
how good the level is. These feelings range from "boring" to Superb. The
better the feeling, the better the items on the level, and the more
difficult the monsters. There is also a Special feeling, available only
to players not using Preserve mode, which tells the player that there is
an artifact on the level (most of the time. Sometimes, especially in the
earlier levels, a monster pit may trigger a special feeling.). Also, if
you have not spent enough time on the previous level before entering the
new one, you get the feeling "Looks like any other level" which gives
you no information whatsoever.

	On the meaning of those little numbers on your equipment:
	Your equipment will always carry around little numbers that tell you
how effective it is. Armors take this form:

	A Foobar (+x, +y) [a, +b] (+c)

	Weapons take this form:

	A Zoobar XdY (+x, +y) [a, +b] (+c)

	(+x, +y). This is the item's magical bonuses to hit and to damage,
respectively. These are added to whatever other bonuses you have when
you attack.
	[a, +b]. This is the item's base armor class and magical bonus to
armor. The higher, the better. (Note: some armors have a small negative
number in front of this. This is the armors minus to hit; the armor is
so heavy that you have trouble moving around in it. However, these are
generally small enough to be ignored). Most weapons do not have a base
armor class, and only a few have a magical bonus to armor.
	(+c). This is the item's magical bonus to another statistic: Strength,
Intelligence, Wisdom, Constitution, Dexterity, Charisma, Speed,
Searching, Infravision, or Tunneling. This type of bonus is not on every item, 
and can be a good reason to choose a particular item. (Note that it does not
affect every stat in this list! Most items that have a +c only affect
one of these stats. Some items affect more (A Weapon of Westernesse
affects Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution)).
	XdY. This is the weapon's base damage. When you successfully hit a
monster, X number of Y-sided dice are rolled. This number represents the
amount of damage you do to the monster before magical bonuses. A
Longsword, for example, rolls 2 five-sided dice when you hit a monster.

	On the Monster Memory:
	In many other games, you are required to take notes on monster's
weaknesses, strengths, spells, et cetera. Angband takes care of this for
you, with the handy Monster Memory. Every time you find out something
new about a monster, like that it can breathe fire, this is added to
your knowledge of the monster. To look over this knowledge, type /, then
the symbol of the monster. You may have to scroll through other monster
memories to get to the one you're looking for. [Note: you can set a
window to display the monster memory at the preferences screen (see
below). This window will then automatically update as you fight
monsters].

	On the Colors of Monsters
	You can often determine some information about a monster based solely
on it's color. This would be the color it is described as, like "a White
Dragon," not the color of it's image on the screen (you can't rely on a
white "p" to be a cold based monster! It will probably be a paladin or
some such). In general, White means Cold, Red means Fire, Blue means
Electricity, Black Green is acid, although Green is also sometimes
Poison, along with Yellow. Multi-hued is all of these. Crimson causes
Weakness.

	On the Preferences:
	The preferences screen is reached by typing "=". It contains many
different preferences that make Angband more enjoyable. There are a few
that I would recommend. Turn both stacking options ON. This maximizes
your treasure collection. Turn the Low Hitpoint Warning ON, and place
the warning percent at about 50%. You'll see the effects of this
whenever you start to die:). Put the Delay Factor at about 3 or 4. This
lets you see the one animation in Angband: that of the spells zipping
over to their targets and exploding. The rest are up to you.

	On the Autoscummer:
	Available in the Preferences screen, the autoscummer ensures that every
time you enter a new level, it will be of a good quality or higher. Some
people consider it cheating, but keep in mind that, along with better
items, the autoscummer brings nastier monsters, and the monsters
generally outweigh the items.

	On Death:
	Death in Angband is permanent. Saving in Angband is meant only to let
you pick up where you left off; if you die, your savefile is marked. The
next time you try to use the savefile, you will get the new character
dialogue. Ancestors of dead characters will retain their monster memory
and preferences. Many people here have characters like "Yuppy XIV";
people die very often in Angband.
	Some people make backup savefiles; if case their character dies, they
simply load the older character, and pick up where they left off. They
lose what happened after making the backup, but they're alive. However,
this is considered cheating of the highest degree. There is even an
option in the Cheating menu in the Preferences area for cheating death.
The only legal reason to use this is if your computer crashed on you and
your character file became corrupted.

	Advanced techniques for killing monsters:
	Pillardancing. Requires that you be at least twice as fast as the
monster you are fighting. Find a single block of wall, freestanding, and
lure your enemy to it. When both you and your eneny are standing next to
the pillar, hit him, and then move so that you are opposite the pillar
from him. He will use his turn to move so that he's standing next to
you. Hit him again, and then move again. Repeat until he's dead.
	Note that some monsters move eratically, and cannot be relied upon to
move in the method expected. Also, some monsters (mostly Ghosts) can
move through walls, and a small number of monsters can chew through
walls.

	Shoot'n Scoot. Requires a large room, Phase Door, and some type of
missile weapon. Stand at one end of the room, your enemy at the other.
Fire your missile weapon at him until he gets close, and then Phase
Door. Fire again, until he gets close, and repeat. By the time you run
out of ammunition, he should be dead or weak enough for you to finish
him HTH (Hand to Hand).

	Hack'n Back. Requires that you be at least twice as fast as your
opponent. Stand next to your enemy, hit him, and back up. He should use
his turn to move towards you instead of using a missile weapon or a
spell. Hit him again, back up again, repeat. This is a little more
dangerous than Pillardancing, because the monster gets a chance to
breathe or cast a spell, but it's easier to set up.

	Wail'n Bail. Requires Teleport items. Fight the monster until you're
almost dead, teleport out, find him, and resume fighting. This is
dangerous, because you could teleport right next to some nasty that will
kill you. Also, it is not generally useful for killing unique monsters,
as they regenerate damage very quickly, and by the time you find them
again, they will have healed what you did to them.

	The Anti-Summoning Corridor. Required a little time to set up. This can
be done just about anywhere. Dig a twisting corridor into the rock, and
station yourself at one end of it. When your opponent arrives, he won't
be able to summon any monsters next to you. This is a very important
technique for fighting many higher-end monsters which very quickly bring
in a horde of other monsters.

	On places on the Internet:
	There are tons of sites you can visit on the Internet. There is,
however, a fair amount of duplication, and almost every site has links
to the other ones. The major ones are
	The Official Angband Website: http://www.phial.com/angband
	Thangorodrim (home of Zangband): http://thangorodrim.angband.org/
	The Angband Ideas Resource:
http://members.tripod.com/~Aidan_Ryder/Start.htm
	The Angband Variants Page:
http://wkweb5.cableinet.co.uk/bablos/angband/
	The Angband Highscores Page (SHARD): //www.bath.ac.uk/~essemb/
	Angband Junk Page: http://www-personal.umich.edu/~mhgraham/Angband/
	The Angband FTP site: ftp://export.andrew.cmu.edu
	You can find links to just about anything related to Angband at these
pages. There is also an Angband newsgroup at rec.games.roguelike.angband


	On the Variants of Angband:
	Since the Angband code is so easy to read after Ben Harrison, the
current maintainer, cleaned it up, many people have created variants of
Angband (note that the base Angband game, from which most variants are
made, is called Vanilla Angband, or just Vanilla). They add whatever
they want to, and then put the games on the Internet for people to play
and comment on. There is a Variants FAQ posted regularly at
rec.games.roguelike.angband which discusses all variants in more depth
than this section. The current major variants (obtainable at
ftp://export.andrew.cmu.edu or http://thangorodrim.angband.org/) are:
	Zangband: the most prolific variant, based on the works of Zelazny
(hence the Z), adding a slew of items, monsters, races, classes, vaults,
and a healthy degree of silliness. Some people consider it more
difficult than Vanilla Angband (the base game, from which most variants
are made), but most people who make it to the higher levels consider it
easier. I recommend against playing Zangband until you can reliably get
a character to level 30 without cheating; if you can't, you'll spend a
lot of time dying in Zangband. 
	Pziband: Formerly Psiband, it merged with Zangband. The only major
addition is the Psionicist class, which uses psionic foci wielded in the
amulet slot to cast spells. The Psionicist is horrible at melee, hard to
get started, and tends to die a lot. Still, at the later levels they're
a lot of fun.
	Kangband: adds to the game without disrupting balance. Kangband adds
quests, a wilderness level, a few new races and classes, and a few
items. It is much closer to Vanilla than Zangband is, and a new player
can easily understand it. It also stays truer to the Tolkein theme than
Zangband does.
	Kamband: a fun variant which came from Kangband. Not too balanced,
decently difficult in a die-quickly kind of way, and a lot of fun to
play. Adds a lot of new races/classes including the Death Mold, the
Leprechaun, Mimics, and more
	Pernband: a still-young variant which attempts to add elements of
McCathrey's Pern series, fun. Also has elements of Kamband and Zangband.
It also tries to come back to a tolkien spirit. It include some more races
and a lot of new classes. A bunch of monster, artifacts and ego-item and
object kind have been added. It's a realy lot of fun to play.
	Oangband: Opinion Angband was created to address some perceived
problems with Angband. The combat system underwent radical changes and
was simplified, but it is very different and takes some adjustment. Many
of the combat techniques in this text no longer work. Several classes
and many spells were added, and there are other changes and additions.
Similar to Angband. If you get used to the combat system in other
variants, you'll have trouble adjusting to Oangband's system, and vice
versa. However, once you understand Oangband melee, it makes much more
sense than the other variants.
	Sangband (Skills Angband): Instead of advancing skills as you gain
levels, in this variant you apply your experience to various skills,
like Swordmanship, Magic Using, Weaponsmithing, et cetera. Also, there
is no longer a player class; "class" is determined by the types of
skills you choose to develop. You could be a brutish
swordsman/weaponsmith, a mediocre druid/archer, a Vanilla-style mage, or
just about anything else. A few new races were added, along with new
monsters and items. This game is still in developement, and alternates
between very abusable and very difficult.
	
	By this time, you should have a good idea of how to play Angband. Good
luck, and KILL MORGOTH!
