==== New Commands ====

The following commands are new to Unnamed Angband:

Apply rune (y) or Engrave a rune (^G)
        Apply a rune from a runestone to an object. Applying runes to
        objects can have various effects, from transforming an object to a 
        type more closely associated with that rune, to enchanting the object
        with a magical effect or even an ego power. More runes applied to an
        object will have additional, and often cumulative effects, up to 4 or 5
        runes on most objects. Current applying a rune to another rune acts like
        other objects: in a future version this will cause a magical effect.
        If an object cannot have a rune applied to it, it is likely to be an
        artifact or powerful ego item of some kind. Note that not all runes
        have a beneficial effect, but more than one rune is usually an increase
        in power.

==== Changed Commands ====

The following commands act differently from Vanilla Angband:

--- Inventory Commands ---

Equipment list (e)
        There is an additional BELT slot which can have any item wielded
        into it. Items in your belt slot do not apply any special powers
        or effects to the character but these items can be wielded/fired
        and otherwise used in half the normal time. In addition, any
        item may be wielded into your WIELD slot for the same benefits,
        but you will only attack with weapons, and can only kick to attack
        if you are holding other items.

Destroy an item (k) or Destroy an item (^D)
        Destroying some items will release whatever is trapped inside.

Wear/Wield equipment (w)
        You can wield any equipped item to move it to your belt slot. If
        you can wield the belt slot item back in the equipment slot it will
        be swapped, otherwise the existing belt slot item will be dropped.
        As describe above, any item can be wielded to halve the time it
        takes to use the item. Wielding items from the floor takes half
        the energy that Angband requires.

--- Movement Commands ---

Walk (with pickup) (;)
Walk (flip pickup) (-)
        If you walk into a hidden monster, you will push over it, as opposed
        to attacking it, as you would an invisible monster. Walking also
        takes half the energy of vanilla Angband, unless you are moving in
        Search mode or over slippery or treacherous terrain. This is
        balanced by forcing you to Rest to recover from being tired every so
        often. This is affected by your Constitution: a higher Constitution
        allows you to have to rest less frequently.

Go up staircase or travel (<)
        If you have a map, or are in campaign mode, you can use the < key to
        travel to an adjacent location while you are on the surface.
        This uses some food and adds to the time, and requires that you
        are Full and near the edge of the wilderness map. You will be
        required to recover from bleeding, stun or poison damage and other
        conditions that impair you.

Go down staircase or well (>)
        You may climb down wells in the dungeon in addition to staircases.

--- Resting Commands ---

Stay still (with pickup) (,) or Stay still (with pickup) (.)
Stay still (flip pickup) (g)
        These commands all take half the time of vanilla Angband.


--- Searching Commands ---

Search (s)
        Searching can spot if water is deep, and identify many other hidden
        terrain features.

--- Alter Commands ---

Tunnel (T) or Tunnel (^T)
        You can tunnel into some of the new terrain, although ice will cut
        you on its sharp edges.

Open a feature (o)
        Opening can be performed on some types of new terrain, such as
        curtains and cupboards.

Close a feature (c)
        Closing can now be used on chests to protect items in the same
        location as the chest from being stolen by monsters or damaged by
        magical attacks. Cupboards also provide this benefit. Closing
        previously locked doors will lock them again, although not as
        effectively as before.

Bash a feature (B) or Force a feature (f)
        Trees and other wooden features may be bashed to destroy them.

Disarm a feature (D)
        Doors may also be trapped, and trapped doors may be disarmed as
        a consequence.

Jam a door/Set a trap (j) or Spike a door/Set a trap (S)
        Certain objects can be effectively used to set a trap that can
        delay, injure or even kill monsters. This command allows you to
        attempt to set a trap using any object. Some objects will only prove
        to be a distraction to monsters, however the majority should injure
        or apply spell effects against a monster. This ability is affected
        by your disarm skill - in particular you can accidentally set off
        an object while you are attempting to set a trap with that object,
        should it be significantly more powerful than your abilities.
        You can also use spikes to make pit traps more dangerous.
        This command may take a count, requires a direction, and takes some 
        energy.

--- Spell Commands ---


Browse a book (b) or Peruse a book (P)
        Browsing now allows you to select a spell in a spell books for
        a comprehensive list of what effects that spell has.

        All spell-using classes may read song books, but classes other
        that bards and shamans will only be able to use some of the spells
        from the book. Runestones may also be browsed by all classes,
        however runestones only permit more than one spell by combining two
        runestones together, so that at best you will have 4 spells available
        with 2 runestones, 9 spells with 3 runestones and so forth. The first
        runestone browsed determines the noun, the other runestones in your
        inventory acting as verbs to modify its effects. Runestones are best
        utilised by shamans as a result.

Gain new spells, prayers, songs or runes (G)
        You are not limited in Unangband to a maximum of 64 spells: instead
        your intelligence and books and runes available to you dictate what
        magic you can learn. Note that priests and paladins may also study
        at altars in the dungeon to learn spells: these are less useful in
        that the spells may only cast while standing on the altar until you
        discover the appropriate book they occur in. The various specialist
        classes may also learn spells earlier.

Cast a spell (m)
        You must possess the book or combination of runestones, or be standing
        on the appropriate altar to cast a spell. Note that all classes use this
        command to cast spells. In future versions (p) will be used to prepare
        items to make new magical items.
        
        You can also use this command to cancel singing a song, if you are a
        bard.

--- Object Manipulation Commands ---

Eat some food (E)
        You may also eat the fruit from various trees and bushes in the
        Dungeon.

Fill or fuel an item (F)
        In addition to filling lanterns and torches, which you may now do to
        lanterns and torches in your pack or on the floor, you may also fill
        empty bottles and flasks from pools and fountains in the dungeon, in
        order to acquire potions and flasks of oil and other items.

Quaff a potion (q)
        You may quaff from pools of water and from fountains when you are 
        standing in them. Some of these may even have beneficial effects.

Inscribe an object ({)
        After inscribing an identified object, with the easy_autos option
        selected, all such object kinds will be automatically inscribed with
        the same inscription. If this is an ego item, all such ego items will
        be inscribed instead.

        The following additional inscriptions are available: =s, which stacks
        2 items with this inscription together as if all the force_stack options
        were available, =d which means you will never pick up an object with
        this inscription, =k which means you will destroy an object with this
        inscription when you walk over it and =i which means you will never 
        remember an object with this inscription, so that it will not be
        displayed on the overhead map.

        In addition, the {good} pseudo-id is extended to include {very good}
        and {great} inscriptions to indicate that an item is increasingly 
        powerful but not an ego item, and the {excellent} pseudo-id is extended
        to include {superb} pseudo-id which indicates the item in question is an
        ego item with a hidden power (Typically the more powerful ego objects).

Uninscribe an object (})
        After uninscribing an identified object, with the easy_autos option
        selected, the automatic inscription will be removed for all objects of 
        this kind. If this is an ego item, the ego item's auto inscription will
        be cleared instead.

--- Magical Object Commands ---

Activate an worn object (A)
        The rings and dragon armours that may be activated may stack with 1
        instance of a charging item of the same type, if these items would
        normally stack if charged, or as many instances as required if
        stacking is forced on the objects.

Aim a wand (a) or Zap a wand (z)
        With pval stacking, wands do not unstack until they are empty, and
        will only sometimes unstack if they are used while not identified.

Use a staff (u) or Zap a staff (Z)
        With pval stacking, staffs do not unstack until they are empty, and
        will only sometimes unstack if they are used while not identified.
        Staffs may also be wielded as weapons, for the most part having 1d6
        damage, and possibly some special powers.

Zap a rod (z) or Activate a rod (a)
        Rods may stack with 1 instance of a charging rod of the same type
        if timeout stacking is enabled, or will always stack with uncharged
        rods if force timeout stacking is enabled.

Fire an item (f) or fire an item (t)
        Items that can be fired apply the appropriate damage type to the
        monster they are thrown against, such as burning arrows, and to
        the ground underneath.  Slings may now be used to lob potions
        for a much greater distance, as well as improving the damage and
        damage of throwing weapons, such as javelins or spears.

        Important note: In order to take advantage of throwing weapons such
        as daggers, batons, darts, javelins and spears, and the additional
        benefits of throwing styles, you need to 'fire' rather than throw
        these weapons. This restricts the list of items you may choose to
        those balanced for throwing, but gives you the additional damage
        multiplier and shots of your style, and counts the to-hit and damage
        bonus of the weapon twice.  You cannot be wielding a bow, sling or
        crossbow in order to do this.

Throw an item (v)
        In many instances, you may be able to throw part of the terrain you
        are on. Some items will also apply the appropriate damage type to
        the monster they are thrown against and the ground underneath;
	others may be consumed by unintelligent monsters or animals if
	thrown to them.

        Important note: In order to take advantage of throwing weapons such
        as daggers, batons, darts, javelins and spears, and the additional
        benefits of throwing styles, you need to 'fire' rather than throw
        these weapons. This restricts the list of items you may choose to
        those balanced for throwing, but gives you the additional damage
        multiplier and shots of your style, and counts the to-hit and damage
        bonus of the weapon twice.  You cannot be wielding a bow, sling or
        crossbow in order to do this.

--- Looking Commands ---

Look around (l) or Examine things (x)
        You can look at yourself to see the room description of the room you are
        in, and any object, monster or feature in a room other than the one you
        are in.

--- Game Status Commands ---

Check knowledge (~)
        This command allows you to ask about the knowledge possessed by
        your character.  Currently, this includes being able to list all
        known "artifacts", "uniques", "ego items" and "objects", and the
        contents of your home. Normally, once an artifact is "generated",
        and "lost", it can never again be found, and will become "known" to
        the player.  With "preserve" mode, an artifact can never be "lost"
        until it is "known" to the player.  In either case, any "known"
        artifacts not in the possession of the player will never again be 
        "generated".  The "uniques" are special "unique" monsters which can
        only be killed once per game.  Certain "objects" come in "flavors",
        and you must determine the effect of each "flavor" once for each
        such type of object, and this command will allow you to display all
        "known" flavors. Other objects and ego items are displayed as you 
        encounter them in the game.
        Auto-inscriptions are inscriptions that are automatically created
        when an item is created or identified. Currently you can set
        auto-descriptions for all items of a particular type (tval), kind
        or ego item type. In a future version, this will be expanded to
        match the auto-squelch functions of other variants.


--- Extra Commands ---

Save html screen dump (]) or (^])
        This command dumps a "snap-shot" of the current screen to the file
        "dump.htm", including encoded color information. Unlike the above
        screen shot commands, this screen dump is in html format. Currently
        Unangband does not have the ability to reload html screen shots
        dumped in this manner.

        Using ctrl-right-bracket to invoke this command will dump the
        html file but without any visual feedback as to the success or
        failure of this command. This method of invoking this command may
        be used any time Unangband is expecting keyboard input, however it
        will use the currently set visual prefs, rather than the underlying
        'ASCII' visuals.