                 Cat-and-the-Hack Angband 2.9.1.3

CatH-Angband was started in 1997 as an attempt to balance out the classes a
bit, make certain classes fit their idioms a bit better, and a couple minor
user interface tweaks to make life a little bit easier. Unfortunately, just as
I finished fixing up the bugs that were in, I joined the Air Force, and CatH
was shelved for three years, almost to the day.

Finally, however, I've had the Angband bug again, and so CatH has gotten its
update for the decade ;) Amazingly the source was still floating around, and I
had documented her changes quite thouroughly in the code, so porting it to the
2.9.1 codebase wasn't too hard.

Thanks to all the Angband maintainers from Robert to Robert, Greg Wolledge for
the ideas I took from GW-Angband, dunno at victoly.com for the web space, and
then sourceforge when that petered out, the evil beasts which populate rgra and
#angband, and you for actually noticing this readme, let alone CatH itself :)

Be sure to read the birth.txt file for information on the new races.



New in version 2.9.1.3:

A new race, the Lagdalen, has been added, with inherent speed and eventual
free action at the cost of the ability to wear rings or gloves.

Wood Elves (and any new race with the INH_MIGHT flag) get an extra bonus point
to extra might when they reach level 25, if they use a bow.

Hitting "m" as a prayercaster will preform a prayer, and vice versa.

The bug with the "Study" message being partially erased has been fixed.

Changes from Vanilla Angband:

The critical hits system has been redone for most classes. While mages have the
same ol' system as before, other classes can now get crits more frequently, and
with more power, depending on the weight of their weapons; the heavier, the
better. For warriors and paladins, this factor could now make large axes and
such a more attractive proposition than the extra-blow generating whips and
such that get used in Vanilla. In the same vein, the hits-per-blows table has
been adjusted to make Dexterity 'count' more. (This will generally be bad for
most players.)

Elemental rings, such as Rings of Flame or Vilia, now 'confer' powers to the
weapon you're weilding. For example, if you have a normal short sword (+0, +0)
and a Ring of Flames, you are effectively attacking with a Short Sword of
Burning (+0, +0). Some other artifacts also confer powers to weapons as well.

Poison brand (x3) has been added, along with Weapons of Venom.

[2.9.1.2] Range weapons of ammunition have been added, which magically create a
shot, arrow or bolt when needed. Ammo created in this manner is enchanted to
around (+5,+5), give or take, and disappears after use.

The kobold has been added as a player race. The kobold has mediocre stats at
best, but sports poison resistance.

[2.9.1.2] Wood elves have been added as a player race, being highly specialized
with the bow, including intrinsic extra might.

[2.9.1.2] Dark Avatars have been added as a player race, with incredible stats
and resist nether, but with intrinsic drain experience.

[2.9.1.3]A new race, the Lagdalen, has been added, with inherent speed and
eventual free action at the cost of the ability to wear rings or gloves.

Players now have a chance to save their armor from being damaged from acid
attacks, depending on their Dexterity. However, if this succeeds, the player
will take full damage (the player takes half damage if it hits the armor). Acid
and fire attacks also have a small chance of disfiguring the player, reducing
Charisma.

Added Scrolls of Set Recall Depth, which work as per title. Don't read these in
the town, as you can't cancel out of them (yet), and you can't set the depth to
lower than the level you're on.

[2.9.1.3]Wood Elves (and any new race with the INH_MIGHT flag) get an extra bonus point
to extra might when they reach level 25, if they use a bow.

Rogues who attack a sleeping creature deal out extra damage, depending on the
kind of weapon they use (light blades do most damage).

Attacking a sleeping monster will always hit, regardless of class. How could
you miss?

Rangers have improved object feelings. While they're still the second-worst
class, they no longer are as boring to play early on. To compensate, their
Identify spell has been pushed back a few levels.

Autoscumming is now available on sartup, and _not_ while the character is
alive. In addition, there is now a "Nightmare mode" which quadruples the chance
of a special room being generated.

The monster health bar has been altered, ala GW-Angband; it now displays the
status of the monster, whether asleep, afraid, or whatever.

After you've beaten Morgoth, you are no longer limited to diving to level 127.
If you have the patience, you can dive to level 9999; about 94 miles deep. The
odds of finding good objects don't increase as you dive beyond 127 however
unless you're in nightmare mode; the monsters do get tougher, however. At ten
minutes a level, you'll spend over two months straight to reach the bottom.

The temple now stocks stat restore potions so you don't go to tears waiting for
the stupid alchemy to restock that restore Strength you need so badly.

Destroyed levels are now optional; you can turn them off in the menus.

Magic mushroom patches have been removed, because they are flat out the most
irritating little (*#$#@s on the planet :) They have been replaced with touger
archers. The graphics tiles have not been updated however, since I don't use
them and am too lazy to redraw them :)

[2.9.1.2] Colorized the monster recall window, so that certain numbers stand
out a little better. Note in particular that a monster's depth is in red if
it's out of your maximum depth, umber if it's at or before depth.

[2.9.1.3]Hitting "m" as a prayercaster will preform a prayer, and vice versa.

A "Quick mode" option for the autoroller, which gets rid of a delay in the
autoroller loop, generating stats very quickly. You're still currently limited
to one million rolls, however.

The status info at the side of the dungeon view now displays how much Exp is
needed to get to the next Character level.

[2.9.1.3] Hitting "m" as a prayercaster will preform a prayer, and vice
versa.

Various other undocumented featu^W^Wsuprises.

Version History:

Changes from 2.9.1.2 to 2.9.1.3:

Wood Elves (any any new race with the INH_MIGHT flag) get an extra bonus point
to extra might when they reach level 25, if they use a bow.

Hitting "m" as a prayercaster will preform a prayer, and vice versa.

The bug with the "Study" message being partially erased has been fixed.

Changes from 2.9.1.1 to 2.9.1.2:

Wood elves have been added as a player race, being highly specialized with the
bow, including intrinsic extra might.

Dark Avatars have been added as a player race, with incredible stats and resist
nether, but with intrinsic drain experience.

Range weapons of ammunition have been added, which magically create a shot,
arrow or bolt when needed. Ammo created in this manner is enchanted to around
(+5,+5), give or take, and disappears after use.

Colorized the monster recall window, so that certain numbers stand out a little
better. Note in particular that a monster's depth is in red if it's out of your
maximum depth, umber if it's at or before depth.

Fixed a bug with the rogue attacking a sleeping creature, resulting in a page
fault.

Added actual history info for the kobold.

Fixed errors in the shopkeeper table.

Updated the 'V' (version) command.

Changes from 2.8.53 to 2.9.1.1:

Ported to the 2.9.1 codebase. Many many things are tweaked, more than I care to
remember right now :) Most of the previous versions is in here tho, plus and
minus a couple details.

Changes from 2.8.52 to 2.8.53

*   Fixed nasty bug that made nearly every room 'unusual', making for insa-
	  nely difficult dungeons.

*   Optimized the 'display overhead view' sub-window so that it doesn't print
     while running. (Though it probably should refresh when the player stops.)

*   Fixed a couple spelling errors.

*   The nominal weight capacity in the inventory/equip window is now truly
     fixed (honest!)

*   Fixed a couple spelling errors.

*   Fixed the marksman. It's a he now, and he can attack.

*   The player may now choose a random race and class, if desired. (the
     combo will always be valid, but since currently all combos are valid
     this is a moot point for now.)

*   Added ammo of venom.

*   Added the 'to go' thingy in the dungeon display's status view (under EXP:)

Changes from 2.8.50 to 2.8.52

*   Now properly calculates the player's nominal capacity (it's 60% of weight
     limit, not 50%.

*   Fixed error in calculating total damage (the damage multiplier was
     reduced by one.)

*   The scoreboard now works properly. (These scoreboards are _not_ com-
     patible with Angband's. It has been modified slightly to facillitate
     insane depths.)

*   Made the Glaive of Pain 32 pounds to reduce the number of blows/round.

