=== Version Information ===

This file was last updated for Angband 2.9.2 with the JLE info.txt files patch.

Make sure to read the newsgroup ("rec.games.roguelike.angband"), and to visit
the Official Angband Home Page ("http://thangorodrim.angband.org") for the
most up to date information about Angband.

Angband 2.9.2 has an incredibly complex history, and is the result of a
lot of work by a lot of people, all of whom have contributed their time
and energy for free, being rewarded only by the pleasure of keeping alive
one of the best freeware games available anywhere.

The version control files, if they existed, would span more than ten years
time, and more than six different primary developers.  Without such files,
we must rely on simpler methods, such as change logs, source file diffs, and
word of mouth.  Some of this information is summarized in this file.

Please be sure to read the copyright information at the end of this file.

=== Brief Version History ===

First came "VMS Moria", by Robert Alan Koeneke (1985).

Then came "Umoria" (Unix Moria), by James E. Wilson (1989).

Details about the history of the various flavors of Moria, the direct
ancestor to Angband, can be found elsewhere. Note that Moria has been 
ported to a variety of platforms, and has its own (very quiet) newsgroup, 
and its own fans.

In 1990, Alex Cutler and Andy Astrand, with the help of other students
at the University of Warwick, created Angband 1.0, based on the existing
code for Umoria 5.2.1.  They wanted to expand the game, keeping or even
strengthening the grounding in Tolkien lore, while adding more monsters
and items, including unique monsters and artifact items, plus activation,
pseudo-sensing, level feelings, and special dungeon rooms.

Over time, Sean Marsh, Geoff Hill, Charles Teague, and others, worked on
the source, releasing a copy known as "Angband 2.4.frog_knows" at some
point, which ran only on Unix systems, but which was ported by various
people to various other systems.  One of the most significant ports was
the "PC Angband 1.4" port, for old DOS machines, which added color and
various other significant changes, only some of which ever made it back
into the official source.

Then Charles Swiger (cs4w+@andrew.cmu.edu) took over, sometime in late
1993, cleaning up the code, fixing a lot of bugs, and bringing together
various patches from various people, resulting in several versions of
Angband, starting with Angband 2.5.1 (?), and leading up to the release
of Angband 2.6.1 (and Angband 2.6.2) in late 1994.  Some of the changes
during this period were based on suggestions from the "net", and from
various related games, including "UMoria 5.5", "PC Angband 1.4", and
"FAngband".

Angband 2.6.1 was primarily targetted towards Unix/NeXT machines, and
it required the use of the low level "curses" commands for all screen
manipulation and keypress interaction.  Each release had to be ported
from scratch to any new platforms, normally by creating visual display
code that acted as a "curses" emulator.  One such port was "Macintosh
Angband 2.6.1", by Keith Randall, which added support for color, and
which formed the basis for the first release of Angband 2.7.0.

During the last half of 1994, Ben Harrison had been playing with
the Angband source, primarily to investigate the possibility of making
some kind of automatic player for Angband, like the old "rogue-o-matic"
program for the game "rogue".  The difficulty of compiling a version
for the Macintosh, and the complexity of the code, prevented this, and
so he began cleaning up the code in various ways for his own personal use.

In late 1994, Charles Swiger announced that he was starting a real job
and would no longer be able to be the Angband maintainer.  This induced
some amount of uproar in the Angband community (as represented by the
Angband newsgroup), with various people attempting to form "committees"
to take over the maintenance of Angband.  Since committees have never
given us anything but trouble (think "COBOL"), there was very little
resistance when, on the first day of 1995, Ben Harrison made his code 
available, calling it "Angband 2.7.0", and by default, taking over as 
the new maintainer of Angband. 

Angband 2.7.0 was a very clean (but very buggy) rewrite that, among other
things, allowed extremely simple porting to multiple platforms, starting
with Unix and Macintosh, and by the time most of the bugs were cleaned up,
in Angband 2.7.2, including X11, and various IBM machines.  Angband 2.7.4
was released to the "ftp.cis.ksu.edu" site, and quickly gained acceptance,
perhaps helped by the OS2 and Windows and Amiga and Linux ports.  Angband
2.7.5 and 2.7.6 added important capabilities such as macros and user pref
files, and continued to clean up the source.  Angband 2.7.8 was released
to the major ftp archives as the first "stable" version in a year or so,
with new "help files" and "spoiler files" for the "online help", plus a
variety of minor tweaks and some new features.

After Angband 2.7.8 was released, Ben created a web site to keep track of
all the changes made in each version (though a few may have been missed),
and acquired the use of a new develoepement ftp server to supplement the
official "mirror" server.  This web site is now permanently located at
the Official Angband Home Page (http://thangorodrim.angband.org/).
Unfortunately, the next six versions were numbered Angband 2.7.9v1 to
Angband 2.7.9v6, but really each were rather major updates.  Angband 2.8.0
and 2.8.1 were released using a more normal version scheme.  Angband 2.8.2
and 2.8.3 add a few random features, clean up some code, and provide
graphics support and such for a few more platforms.

After the release of Angband 2.8.3 Ben's free time was more and more
occupied by his work.  He released a beta version of Angband 2.8.5 
which introduced many new features, but couldn't give as much attention 
to maintaining the game as he wanted to. Meanwhile, an "unofficial" 
version, entitled "2.8.3h", was released by Robert Ruehlmann (originally 
as an enhanced version for DOS, but it was ported to all platforms) 
incorporating three of the most popular Angband patches: Tim Baker's 
"Easy" patch for better handling of doors and traps, Keldon Jones's 
"Monster AI" patch so that monsters behaved more intelligently if the
correct option was set, and Greg Wooledge's "Random Artifact Generator"
was also added as a startup option.

So in March 2000, Robert Ruehlmann offered to take over Angband and
started to fix the remaining bugs in the Angband 2.8.5 beta.  The
resulting version has now been released as Angband 2.9.0, and future 
updates have resulted in Angband 2.9.2.

Meanwhile, I (Jonathan Ellis) had been playing Angband for ages, having 
known the game of Moria since 1984 and rediscovered Angband in 1994. I 
had recently developed an interest in tinkering with the info.txt files, 
and eventually decided to release the results to the general public. The 
first such patch was merely a collection of "fixes" of illogical features,
such as certain more powerful monsters being worth less in the way of XP
than their less powerful counterparts, or creatures with two claws and one
mouth having three bite and one claw attacks: all the extra monsters and 
artifacts were originally just a sideline (yeah, right. Honest, guv...) 
which started out with the appearance of Eol and Maeglin, and the Greater 
Balrog, all of which I had created for KAngband (independently of other 
monsters of the same name, which exist in OAngband and PernAngband) and 
submitted to the author of that variant. In vanilla Angband, they had to 
take the place of existing monsters of course.

It was not until late 1999 that I wrote my first entirely new artifact:
the Palantir of Westernesse. Over the course of the following year, new 
features were added to Angband, and all taken advantage of: the addition 
of Resist Fear (which had happened in 2.7.9, but nobody had used it yet), 
the fractional speed system allowing small speed bonuses on more artifacts
(again, a feature which had been present for a long time but never used - 
the three speed artifacts Feanor, Ringil and Cubragol remained firmly 
rooted in the old speed system), the new 'Summon Greater Demons' ability 
for monsters, and finally - in Angband 2.9.1 - the long-awaited ability to
expand the monster, artifact and ego-item lists without removing old items
and monsters to make way. 

Since then, items and monsters which seem to me (and yes, I admit it's 
arbitrary, but there you go) to fit the flavour of vanilla Angband and 
enhance its variety have since then been added. One of my particular 
favourites is the idea of the item that is both good and bad: the cursed 
item with one or two redeeming features, the good item with an annoying 
drawback. For this reason my favourite artifact has always been Calris...
I have never been keen on the pointless nothing-but-bad artifacts or 
Morgul weapons, as they add nothing to the game once the player has 
learnt to Identify or pseudo-ID all items - something which happens 
usually about two minutes into the first game. Nobody is ever going to 
get caught by a Morgul weapon more than once: given the easy availability 
of Identify and pseudo-ID, what cursed items need is not to catch out the 
unwary newbie (which is all they currently do), but to give experienced 
players a reason to use them even knowing them to be cursed.

I have always tried to keep an eye on game balance and playability, most 
notably trying to break up the infamous "2000' Triple Whammy" of needing 
poison resistance, confusion resistance, and 550 hit points to survive an
unresisted nether breath (as nether resist cannot be relied on to appear 
at all), all at once around the 2000' region, and needing to wait for ages 
clearing the same depth over and over again to get the combination of all 
three: this was especially problematic in the days when Rings of Resist 
Poison belonged at 3000' instead of 2000'. In particular, I am hoping that 
it will be possible to dive just that bit deeper with fewer hit points and 
perhaps with stats not yet maxed. Also, spreading the tougher monsters 
(both unique and non-unique) out over levels deeper in the dungeon is 
intended to make these levels more interesting, rather than keep the old 
situation with nothing but uniques after about 3200' and nothing to do 
but drop straight from 2500' to 4900' and scum for speed rings.

It could be said that this patch is a demonstration of just how much can be 
done for Angband with the info.txt files alone. Or it could be said that it
is a demonstration of how much can be shouted about by someone who refuses 
to keep his big mouth shut and still cannot write a single line of code. 
Your choice. :-)

The Official Angband Home Page ("http://thangorodrim.angband.org/") serves
not only as the most up to date description of Angband, but also lists
changes made between versions, and changes planned for upcoming versions,
and lists various email addresses and web sites related to Angband.

=== Some of the changes between Angband 2.6.1 and Angband 2.9.2 ===

It is very hard to pin down, along the way from 2.6.2 to 2.9.2, exactly
what changes were made, and exactly when they were made.  Most releases
involved so many changes from the previous release as to make "diff files"
not very useful, since often the diff files are as long as the code itself.
Most of the changes, with the notable exception of the creation of some of
the new "main-xxx.c" files for the various new platforms, and a few other
minor exceptions generally noted directly in comments in the source, were
written by Ben or Robert, either spontaneously, or, more commonly, as the 
result of a suggestion or comment by an Angband player.

The most important modification was a massive "code level cleanup" for 2.7.x, 
largely completed in 2.7.8, that made all other modifications much simpler 
and safer.  This cleanup was so massive that in many places the code is no 
longer recognizable, for example, via "diff -r", often because it was 
rewritten from scratch.

The second most important modification was the design of a generic "z-term.c"
package, which allows Angband to be ported to a new machine with as few as 50
lines of code.  Angband 2.9.2 thus runs without modification on many machines,
including Macintosh, PowerMac, Unix/X11, Unix/Curses, Amiga, Windows, OS2-386,
DOS-386, and even DOS-286.

It would be difficult to list all of the changes between Angband 2.6.1 and
Angband 2.9.2, because many of them were made in passing during the massive
code level cleanup.  Many of the changes are invisible to the user, but still
provide increased simplicity and efficiency, and decreased code size, or make
other more visable changes possible.  For example, the new "project()" code
that handles all bolts, beams, and balls, the new "update_view()" code that
simplifies line of sight computation, or the new "generate()" code that builds
new levels in the dungeon.  Many changes have been made to increase efficiency,
including the new "process_monsters()" and "update_monsters()" functions, and
the new "objdes()" and "lite_spot()" routines.  The generic "z-term.c" package
yielded efficient screen updates, and enabled the efficient use of "color". 

The most visible (to ordinary players) changes that happened as a result of 
Ben Harrison's maintainership were (a) a far greater degree of user-
customizability as shown by the info.txt files - of which I might hasten to 
add that patches such as this one are in my opinion the logical consequence, 
and indeed the chances are that this one will be merely the first of many 
by different authors (R. Kleitman has already taken up the idea with a 
"Discband", based on the variant ZAngband and Terry Pratchett's Discworld): 
(b) the "fractional" speed system, with +10 in the new scheme equalling +1 
in old money, and (c) object stacking, the ability to have more than one 
object in a square: first tried in 2.7.9, completed in 2.8.2. Ben also 
changed exactly one monster (Novice Paladin group monster replacing the 
Seedy-Looking Human) and renamed one other (Jabberwock to Chaos Beetle - 
reversed in this patch), redistributed some between the letters (with the 
side-effect that the old power of Summon Reptiles - which could get wimpy 
frogs, lizards and snakes as well as tough hydras - became Summon Hydras, 
who are generally much tougher) and enforced a pair of colour schemes, one 
on the Dragons and Hounds, the other on the People and Humanoids. Fear 
resistance was added to the game, but not made use of except as a random 
possible resistance on Elvenkind armor (at least, not until the predecessor 
of this patch was released.)

It should also be pointed out at this point that the far cleaner nature of 
Ben's code as compared to previous versions has given many other people the 
opportunity to base code for their own Angband variants on it. And so a 
plethora of new variants have appeared, many of them far more different from 
Angband now than Angband ever was from Moria, and yet still based on Ben's 
coding ideals for Angband. Indeed, it could be said that to someone wanting
to code a variant now, the situation is remarkably similar to the situation 
I describe above with the user-editability of the text files, but just on a 
somewhat different scale, and done by people who understand C. The only 
surprise is that there have been so many variants and patches at the code 
level (accessible only to computer programmers) and only this one so far at 
the info-txt (user-editable by non-computer-programmers) level. I suppose 
this is probably because such a high proportion of the Angband community 
are computer geeks who enjoy coding even more than playing... :-)

For Angband 2.9.0, the first few new visible features were a random artifact 
generator (originally developed from a variant by Greg Wooledge), an option to 
improve monster AI (believed to have originally started out life in a patch 
written by Keldon Jones), and a patch to allow easier handling of opening and 
closing doors and disarming traps by Tim Baker. For Angband 2.9.1 has also 
come such things as the ability to increase the size of the info.txt files
and thus the number of monsters, artifacts, items, ego-items and vaults in 
the game (many new vaults were written by Chris Weisiger, some by others, and 
the number of vaults in the game at this time was doubled), and much greater 
customizability of ego-items has become possible thanks to a patch written by 
Matthias Kurzke. It is also now possible to add new character races to the 
game, and to edit the shopkeepers with respect to their greed, tolerance of 
haggling and reactions to the character based on his race. Angband 2.9.2 adds 
support for poison branded weapons to the game, and again it is a feature of 
which this patch makes full use. A further list of changes is available with 
the standard distribution of Angband, some in the old version of this file
and some in a separate readme.

=== Previous Versions (outdated) ===


                          VMS Moria Version 4.8
Version 0.1  : 03/25/83
Version 1.0  : 05/01/84
Version 2.0  : 07/10/84
Version 3.0  : 11/20/84
Version 4.0  : 01/20/85

Modules :
     V1.0  Dungeon Generator      - RAK
           Character Generator    - RAK & JWT
           Moria Module           - RAK
           Miscellaneous          - RAK & JWT
     V2.0  Town Level & Misc      - RAK
     V3.0  Internal Help & Misc   - RAK
     V4.0  Source Release Version - RAK

Robert Alan Koeneke               Jimmey Wayne Todd Jr.
Student/University of Oklahoma    Student/University of Oklahoma





                        Umoria Version 5.2 (formerly UNIX Moria)
Version 4.83 :  5/14/87
Version 4.85 : 10/26/87
Version 4.87 :  5/27/88
Version 5.0  :  11/2/89
Version 5.2  :   5/9/90

James E. Wilson, U.C. Berkeley
                 wilson@ernie.Berkeley.EDU
                 ...!ucbvax!ucbernie!wilson

Other contributors:
D. G. Kneller         - MSDOS Moria port
Christopher J. Stuart - recall, options, inventory, and running code
Curtis McCauley       - Macintosh Moria port
Stephen A. Jacobs     - Atari ST Moria port
William Setzer        - object naming code
David J. Grabiner     - numerous bug reports, and consistency checking
Dan Bernstein         - UNIX hangup signal fix, many bug fixes
and many others...


Copyright (c) 1989 James E. Wilson, Robert A. Koeneke
  This software may be copied and distributed for educational, research, and
  not for profit purposes provided that this copyright and statement are
  included in all such copies.

Umoria Version 5.2, patch level 1

Angband Version 2.0   Alex Cutler, Andy Astrand, Sean Marsh, Geoff Hill, 
                      Charles Teague.

Angband Version 2.4   : 05/09/93

Angband Version 2.5   : 12/05/93 Charles Swiger

Angband Version 2.6   : 09/04/94 Charles Swiger

Angband Version 2.7   : 01/01/95  Ben Harrison

Angband Version 2.8   : 01/01/97  Ben Harrison

Angband Version 2.9   : 01/03/2000 Robert Ruehlmann

Angband Version 2.9.2 : Feb 2001 Robert Ruehlmann

Copyright (c) 1997 Ben Harrison, James E. Wilson, Robert A. Koeneke

This software may be copied and distributed for educational, research,
and not for profit purposes provided that this copyright and statement
are included in all such copies.  Other copyrights may also apply.


All changes made by Ben Harrison and Robert Ruehlmann are also available
under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE.  Note that this doesn't influence
the current distribution, since parts of the source are still only
available under the old Moria/Angband license.  Until all parts of
Angband are distributed under the GPL the only valid license remains
the original Moria/Angband license.

This Patch by JLE (Jonathan Ellis) is also under the GPL license.


=== Contributors (incomplete) ===

Peter Berger, "Prfnoff", Arcum Dagsson, Ed Cogburn, Matthias Kurzke,
Ben Harrison, Steven Fuerst, Julian Lighton, Andrew Hill, Werner Baer,
Tom Morton, "Cyric the Mad", Chris Kern, Tim Baker, Jurriaan Kalkman,
Alexander Wilkins, Mauro Scarpa, John I'anson-Holton, "facade",
Dennis van Es, Kenneth A. Strom, Wei-Hwa Huang, Nikodemus, Timo Pietilä,
Greg Wooledge, Keldon Jones, Shayne Steele, Dr. Andrew White, Musus Umbra,
Jonathan Ellis.


