
===================== The Castle of the Royal Pony Sisters ====================

     Deep within the Everfree Forest like the ancient Castle of the Royal Pony
Sisters.  Within lie the fabled Elements of Harmony, which are told to have the
power to seal away Nightmare Moon.  But beware, for Nightmare Moon knows of 
this as well, and will likely bring her forces to bear to stop you.
	When you exit the town, you will go to the castle automatically. Compared
to what awaits you inside, the dangers of the Everfree Forest are of no real
consequence.

--- Dungeon Features, Light, Level Feelings, and Mining ---

Terrain:
     In Ponyband, the following terrain types affect movement, combat, or 
both.  Because they less frequently take advantage of terrain, monsters 
benefit more from favorable and suffer less from unfavorable terrain than the 
player does.

     Rubble:
          Slows down the player (apart from all types of dwarves) and all 
     monsters that cannot bore or pass through rock.  Ends LOS, stops 
     missiles, bolts, and beams, and reduces 
     the radius of ball spells.  Grants the player and monsters within it some 
     protection from melee, ranged, or magical attacks.  Rubble may dissolve 
     to normal floor.

     Water:
          Greatly slows players (apart from Alicorns) with heavy burdens, and 
     humanoid monstersor fiery, and is impassable to earthbound
     monsters.  All melee or ranged attacks and most spells benefit when the 
     target is in water, especially water-based spells.  Fire-based spells 
     become much less powerful, so find a lake if you battle powerful fire 
	 users.  Water may evaporate.

     Lava:
          Can be passed by any character, but inflicts substantial fire damage 
     (less for players with feather fall or flying - they're light on their 
	 feet).  All monsters other than fiery or strong flying creatures will not 
	 cross.  Water and cold-based spells suffer and fire-based spells become 
	 more powerful against a target in lava.  Lava may freeze to rubble or 
	 normal floor.

     Trees:
          Slows down players not familiar with druidic techniques or elven, 
     and all non-natural monsters that neither fly nor pass through rock.  
     Ends LOS, stops missiles, bolts, and beams, and reduces the radius of 
     ball spells.  Grants the player and monsters within it some protection 
     from melee, ranged, or magical attacks.  Trees can burn.

     Grass:
          Just like open floors, but green.

     Web: 
	  Woven by spiders.  Does not block line of sight or the passage of 
     missiles, but players and monsters other than spiders will need to take a 
     turn to clear the web before they can move on (players using the 'T' 
     command).

     Abyss:
          Inhabitable only by flying monsters or players.  Others venturing 
     (or forced) into it will fall into the darkness.

Staircases, Secret Doors, and Traps:
          Staircases allow your character to ascend or descend from one dungeon
     level to another.  Each dungeon level has at least one up staircase, and 
	 two down staircases, unless it is the home of one of the dungeon 
	 guardians.  Guardians appear on floors 30, 55, 70, and 99, with Nightmare
     Moon herself appearing on level 100, and you must kill them before 
	 staircases will appear.  Otherwise, the staircases are guaranteed, but 
	 they may be difficult to find.  Staircases may sometimes allow you to 
	 ascend or descend more than one level at a time.  Once you leave a level,
     you can never return to it. Identified artifacts will be lost.
          Many secret doors exist in the dungeon, and may lead to anything 
     from a new section of the dungeon level to an empty closet.  As your 
     familiarity with the dungeon grows, you will know where many secret doors 
     are likely to be.  Secret doors always look like granite until found and, 
     for historical reasons, are never locked.  
          Traps also await you in the dungeon and wilderness.  They look like 
     normal floor or grass squares until found, too often by your getting 
     caught by one.  Both secret doors and traps may be found using the 
     's'earch once command, or by going into 'S'earching mode ('#', using the 
     roguelike keyset).  Many classes can also use magic, and everyone can use 
     the appropriate rod or staff.  Be warned: although magical disarming is 
     convenient, it is never a sure thing.

Light:
          Your character must have some source of light in order to see, 
     unless the area around him is lit by sun or magic.  In the wilderness, a 
     light source is not needed during the day; if the sun sets, however, you 
     will find yourself not only in need of illumination, but assailed by 
     monsters that do not dare brave the sunlight.  Depending on the 
     items he has equipped, he may have a light radius of one (torches), two 
     (a lantern), or more, up to a rarely-attained maximum of five.
          A torch or lantern burns fuel, and may be refilled (use the 'F'uel 
     command) with other torches or flasks of oil respectively.  It is 
     rumoured that other light sources exist which never need replenishing.

Level Feelings:
          After being on a level for a short while, you will get a 
     message describing it.  The more interesting the 
     choice of adjectives, the more dangerous and lucrative the level is 
     likely to be.

Themed Levels:
          If you are in a dangerous enough area, and have spent a bit of time 
     on the previous level, you may very rarely find a themed level, filled 
     with monsters of a given type.  Such levels only appear once in a 
     lifetime, so don't leave them unless you really want to.  Vision range is 
     reduced on themed levels.

Mining:
          There is much treasure in the walls of the dungeon, mountains, and 
     sometimes other places, just waiting for an industrious adventurer to 
     come and dig it out.  Once you can afford it, and if you can handle the 
     weight, bring a shovel or pick along.
          As you get richer, the treasures in the wall won't seem so appealing 
     anymore, but keep an item or spell of tunnelling handy.  Not only do all 
     sorts of special vaults lie deep below the surface, some completely en-
     closed by solid rock, but smart adventurers deliberately alter the 
     dungeon to make the most dangerous breathers and summoners manageable.
          Diamond Dogs are exceptionally good miners.
