
List of Wizard commands and their effects.  

Originally written by Leon Marrick for OAngband

Revised for GSNband 1.x

There are two ways of fiddling with the game:  Wizard mode and debug mode.
Both mark your savefile and prevent your character from making the high
score list.

Wizard mode does nothing else except keep your character alive, provide
verbose information on all damage you do to monsters or receive from them,
and explain why an object disappears. To enter wizard mode, hold down the
CTRL key and press 'w'.

Debug mode is a bit more useful. To enter debug mode for the first time,
hold down the CTRL key and press 'a', and respond 'y' to the warning and
question the game provides you with. Any command you type immediately after
holding down the CTRL key and press 'a' will be processed as a debug
command. The debug commands are:

'ESC':  Oops, I didn't mean to type CTRL-a.  Ignore it.
'"':  Generate spoilers on artifacts, objects, and monsters. The spoiler
      files are placed in the ../lib/user directory.
'a':  Cure everything that ails you.
'b':  Takes you to the currently selected target.
'c':  Create any object.  This command brings up a screen to choose a
      general object kind, then a screen to select a specific object.
'C':  Use the command count to create the artifact with that index.
      Requires a command count.  Consult a_info.txt for artifact indexes.
'd':  Detect everything.
'e':  Edit character's internal statistics, experience, and gold.
'f':  *Identify* an object.
'g':  Uses a command count to generate that many good or better quality
      objects.  May take a command count.
'h':  Rerolls all your level bonuses to base hitpoints, and displays a
      figure indicating how they compare to the average (the life rating).
'i':  Identify an object.
'I':  Print max sanity and current sanity, then decrease the latter by 1.
'j':  Jump to any level (up to 127th).
'k':  Self knowledge (as the potion).
'l':  Learn about all objects with a generation level less than or equal
      to the command count.  Requires a command count.
'm':  Magic map the local area.
'M':  Use with the command count to gain a mutation with that number
      (see xtra1.c, function gain_random_mutation). If no command count,
      gain random mutation.
'n':  Use the command count to summon the monster with that index.
      Requires a command count.  Consult r_info.txt for monster indexes.
'N':  As 'n', but the monster will be your pet.
'o':  Tweak an object's quality, pval, bonuses to hit, damage and armour
      class, and quantity.  Don't forget to 'a'ccept the changes
      when done.  This command also allows you to roll up a very large
      number of objects, and find out how good your object is compared
      to others of its type.
'O':  Outfit the player - raises you to level 45-50, gives 5 mln gold,
      raises stats by 100, equips with some nice items (no artifacts).
'p':  Phase door.
'q':  Use with the command count to complete a quest with that index.
      Requires a command count.  Consult q_info.txt for quest indexes.
      (Note: this command is disabled by default).
'r':  Use with the command count to gain a level reward with that
      number, as if from a Chaos deity. If no command count, gain
      random reward.
's':  Use the command count to try summoning that many random monsters
      or monster groups.  May take a command count.
'S':  Force shuffling of stores' inventory (useful only in town).
't':  Teleport.
'u':  Either use maximum sighting range or a command count to unhide
      all monsters up to that range.  May take a command count.
'v':  Uses a command count to generate that many excellent or better
      quality objects.  May take a command count.
'w':  Fully wizard-light the level, including vaults.
'x':  Add the command count to player experience, or double current
      experience and add one.  May take a command count.
'z':  Either use maximum sighting range or a command count to remove
      all monsters up to that range.  May take a command count.
'@':  Show current coordinates in dungeon (mainly for debugging towns).
'+':  Increment internal calendar one day (doesn't do range checking)
'-':  Decrement internal calendar one day (doesn't do range checking)

To enter a command count:  type '0', enter the number desired, and press
enter.  When prompted for a command, hold down the CTRL key and type
'a', then immediately enter a debug command.
