MONSTER
---------

A rebellious monster, who decided to turn against his master
and try to destroy him. The Monster race is completely different
from the other races, and the gameplay is not the same. If you
are a beginner to NewAngband, this race is not recommended.

THE MONSTER RACE
------------------

From version 1.2.0, NewAngband allowed you to play as a monster. The
gameplay of a monster is much different from a regular player. During
the birth, you'll be given a monster body for you to incarnate. Choose
your monster wisely, as the race of the monster is important. You can
get detailed info about your monster by using the '‚' command.

The 'Monster' race lets you incarnate a monster, but you do not get to
change your class. Instead, you use the creature's natural abilities
instead of learning abilities or creating spells. Most creatures have
natural attacks, and have up to four unarmed blows, with damages
varying from creatures to creatures. When using a monster's natural
attacks, your Martial Arts skill is used to improve the damages.
Pay attention to your attacks strength, they make a huge difference.
There are hundreds, perhaps thousands of creatures to choose from.
Some are stronger, some are weaker. Some monsters are allowed the
use of weapons. If you decide to give up your natural attacks in
favor of a weapon, then raise the appropriate skills. Note that
unlike the Monster Mage's morphing abilities, you will NEVER get
returned damages if you use an elemental natural attack on a magic
returning boss.

Many monsters also offers natural spells, such as bolts, balls,
summon spells, support magic and the powerful breath attacks.
Bolt and ball spells have base damages of (level/2)d(level/2),
while breaths have base damages equal to your current hp. Because
monsters have a great amount of hp, your breath attacks will
be your most powerful magics. Spellcraft skill will improve
the damages of these magical attacks.

Monsters also have access to three passive abilities where you can
spend your earned abilities points. Here are the benefits of the
abilities for every points you place in them.

IMPROVED ATTACK: +2 to Martial Arts skill
		 +5 to_hit

IMPROVED DEFENSE: +10% natural AC to base AC(based on monster's natural AC)
		  +2 to base AC
		  +10 to_ac

IMPROVED MAGIC: +10% spells/breaths damages.


Monsters are hard to play, and how you build your character will
greatly depend on the kind of monster you chose. If you have chosen
to play a weaker monster kind, such as the kobold family, you might
want to spend more points on Improved Defense as you will have less
hp to deal with strong monsters. If you would rather play a dragon,
then Improved Attack will make you really powerful, while
Improved Magic will make your breath attacks very powerful. It's up
to you to choose what works best for you, and it all depends on the
monster you incarnate.

EVOLVING
----------

Once you fight a few fights, you will notice that your monster
probably isen't a match for the stronger monsters anymore. You can
then use the Monster's Evolve ability, which allow you to turn into
a more powerful monster of the same kind. To evolve, use the 'Y'
command like you would to change your class normally.
That way, you could rise from a Baby Red Dragon to a Young Red Dragon.
You will never be able to change your basic kind, so if you start as
a giant('P'), you will always be a giant. There are two exceptions
however. A lesser dragon('d') can turn into an ancient dragon('D'),
while a lesser demon('u') can turn into a greater demon('U'). When
using the Evolve ability, you will be able to select a monster with
a depth equal or lower than your current level that is the same kind
of you.

TIPS
------

When first playing as a monster, choose your kind wisely. For
beginners, lesser dragon('d') is an obvious choice, as it will
offer you a great mix of melee and magic power, and a good amount
of hp. Later, you will be able to evolve into the more powerful
Ancient Dragons('D'), which stands amongst the strongest monsters
in the game. More experienced players might like the physically
oriented golems('g'), or the spellcasting liches('L'). Humans('p')
will offer a good, varied choice too. Some kinds are probably
left to those seeking a challenge, such as orc('o') or kobold('k').

Also, unlike the previous versions, the experience required to
level does not increase as you evolve into stronger monsters.
So a Baby Red Dragon requires the same amount of experience to
level up than an Ancient Red Dragon.

Lastly, remember you can only play monsters from the basic r_info,
and not from the Monster Generator. So don't be sad if you cannot
play as a Pink Spotted Arachnoid! :)
