ARMORER'S GUIDE
---------------

Written by Sebek Ironbeard, Ivhalian Dwarven Defender.

We dwarves are known as the best craftsmen in Portralis! Humans are
great and all, but it takes a true mountain man to fully understand
everything there is to understand about metals!

So today, this old dwarf is going to teach you how to craft your
own personnal armor. We'll go step by step!

LEATHER ARMOR
Components type: Crafting
Skill required: 5
How to create: Leather Hide + Clothes Pattern

Well, first, you'll need a leather "armor", if you can call it that.
Looks more like a coat if you ask me, not the kind of thing that will
prevent a blade from cutting your flesh. Still, this is the first
step, so don't screw it up!

HEAVY LEATHER ARMOR
Components type: Crafting
Skill required: 10
How to create: Leather Hide + Leather Armor

What do you get if you put more leather on a leather armor? You get a
heavy leather armor! Didn't expect that, huh? Pfft, it's just a bigger
coat. It's warm though, so wear one if you want to visit Rhyzendal or
something. Or for your own sake, stay away from Rhyzendal, and read
further to learn how to turn this thing into a REAL armor!


All right, so you've got some basic armor, huh? Now, time to turn it
into REAL armor! For this guide, we'll use an easy metal: bronze.
But it will work with any metals. Just practice using bronze, and when
you become more skilled, try a different metal!


BRONZE MAIL
Components type: Crafting
Skill required: 5
How to create: Leather Armor + Ingot of Bronze

What, you were expecting this part to be difficult? Making a nice chain
mail seems like a difficult task, but I'm ready to share some advice
with you on how to make it.

(He gives several tips and tricks on how to make a nice bronze chain
mail.)

There you go, wasn't hard heh? Kinda makes you wonder why peoples still
bother with the leather "armor" and similar crap. This thing's easy to
make, and will actually protect you!

BRONZE PLATE MAIL
Components type: Crafting
Skill required: 15
How to create: Heavy Leather Armor + Ingot of Bronze

Now you're talking! This is what I call a REAL armor! Once you manage to
create that, you can call yourself a smith. Of course, this is only the
beginning. Now you have to do the same thing with iron, and even steel!
But...are you up for the ultimate challenge?

BRONZE FULL PLATE
Components type: Crafting
Skill required: 35
How to create: Bronze Plate Mail + Ingot of Bronze

Heh heh, it's getting tougher heh? This is the best type of armor you
can create. Can't really call yourself a Defender if you don't wear
a full plate armor. You have to be pretty strong to wear that though,
but then, weak Defenders don't exist.


Well, that's about it! All that's left for you to do is to find some
ingots, and start crafting. Start with bronze, then iron and then steel.
And once you can make a nice Steel Full Plate, you can call yourself
a master smith! Heh heh...well, unless you happen to come across
some rare mirhtil ingots, heh heh...good luck with that though! It's
even tougher to craft than steel, and it's pretty rare!
