THEODORE'S JOURNAL, PART I
----------------------------

My name is Theodore, and I am a Diviner. Last night, I had a vision of
adventurers hired to get me, as I am considered by many an heretic and a
blasphemer. So I have to flee. A shame I couldn't complete my experiment.
But there are still a few hours left, so I will take the time to write
this note for anyone who finds it.

A Diviner concentrates on everything that happens in order to predict
a certain future, and anticipate events. Of course, it is never 100% accurate,
absolute destiny does not exists. Something can always happen that will
break a prediction and alter the outcome of events. But what is this
"everything that happens"? How is it called? How come can we Diviners
actually use our powers?

I did my own research on that, and I have heard interesting theories on
the subject. The most interesting one is the theory of the "Flow". According
to this theory, everything is part of some sort of "current", a flow of
forces that contains the essences of everything that exists: thoughts, souls,
magical energies... Every thoughts, every actions are part of it, and
influence other actions and other thoughts. Should it's existence be real,
it would explain why prayers are sometimes granted, and wishes sometimes
come true. It also explains many of the strange powers we Diviners can use.
Altering the Flow means we can alter destiny, and shape it the way we like.
This also means that the school of Divination may be even stronger than I knew.
How lucky for me!

But I wanted to go further, and learn more of this "Flow". I went to one of
Nimbraya's temples, and ask a priest about it. The priest gazed at me with
a mix of anger and fear, and asked me to be careful, and to not investigate
this "Flow" any further. By speaking with other, more open-minded researchers,
I learned another theory. One that gods and archfiends would be incarnations
of this "Flow", beings that are born from the thoughts and souls of peoples,
and essences of the world. This would explain why there are gods for several
aspects of this world. It would also explain why that priest wasn't confortable
speaking of it, as it challenges some religious beliefs.

I borrowed books from other researchers, and started my own researches. It was
best to stay away from Nimbraya, so I came in Jindar country, and found the
site of these old ruins. Looks like some sort of ancient church or something.
It seemed like a good place to start my research. And so I did. After several
weeks, I concluded that should the Flow be real, everything has a place in it.
But if everything has it's place in the Flow, would it be possible to visit
that place? To enter in this "dimmensional" or "temporal" space that occupies
a certain entity...and perhaps even alter it? Would doing so alter the original
entity?

I wanted to test that, so using my powers, I built a device. The goal of this
machine was to try to open some sort of portal to an entity's plane in the Flow.
I have no idea whether this would work or not, but it's worth trying. Imagine
the potential this would have! This would also confirm that the Flow is very
real, and not just a theory. My idea was to start with a simple object.
Because the device uses an enormous quantity of power, I made it requires two
licialhyds to operate properly, to help with the energy transfer and prevent
overloads.

I wanted to go get the licialhyds tomorrow, but during the night, I had this
vision. It looks like Nimbrayan adventurers are after me. This means that
the priests must have heard of my researches, and of my hideout. Could there
be a double agent amongst the researchers I spoke with? Regardless, it seems
I am now tracked down as some sort of heretic, or blasphemous criminal.
I wonder why they are so offended by my research. Surely this means they've
heard of it before. Is it only because they are offended, or are they aware
of some dangers that I don't know about? In any cases, I am leaving this
place. If anyone want to try the device, place an object in the middle of
the central dirt circle(I didn't have paint, so I used the nearby dirt to
mark the spots where objects must be placed). Then place two licialhyds
in the two other spots. Finally, activate the device, which is between the
walls north of the central circle.

Note that I didn't have the chance to test it. I don't think it will work
with magical items, unless the licialhyds are very strong. And then there's
a they might break due to overload... Oh, one more thing, I might have to
turn off the machine to better conceal it(I do not want the adventurers
to destroy it). The main engines are deep underground, and you can access
them by using a secret entrance behind the church(the switch is hidden in
the water in the old altar). Beware however, the underground cave it leads
to is inhabited by dangerous creatures. Better bring a weapon, or you could
be in trouble.

I will leave soon. Perhaps I'll try to build a new machine once I find
a new place to hide, and better test it. If it works, I'll try to improve
it. Assuming it's possible. In any cases, good luck to anyone who find
this note. Hopefully the machine is still functionnal...
