For a long time, I thought I was the only being of my kind living in this world.
Born with the blood of the Gods inside of me, making me a Demigod. While still
inferior to a true God, a Demigod is still quite powerful, and I am certainly
on par with Divine Champions, High Celestials, and other divine beings.
Needless to say, this puts me far, far above the mortals in terms of power.
It will be easy to gain authority on them, and command them to build the world
that I dream of!

But recently, I have learned of a second individual that may have powers
comparable to mine. An Orc, apparently. I always thought that Orcs were nothing
but brutes, unworthy of wielding the powers of the Gods... but I need to check
it out.

-----

It's true! An Orc, by the name of Dorgal, also known as Avemorsh Gin'Whal, was
also born with divine blood! A second Demigod! And one that seeks to make
peace with the other races! Hmmm... perhaps these Orcs aren't as primitive
and barbaric as I thought. This Dorgal could be an obstacle to my plans.
I must eliminate him... or better, bend him to my will!

-----

I'm lucky. His powers haven't fully awakened yet. This is good, I am still
stronger than he is. I will go see him, and offer him a chance to join me.
If he refuses, I will put a curse on his peoples, and force him to accept
my offer.

And if he still refuses... I know of another way to bend him to my will.
By forcing his awakening, using my own powers! This will cause him to
ascend to another plane, and disappear from this world. When he arrives
in the planes where Demigods awakens, he will be mindless, for his
ascension will have been forced, and his conscience won't be able to handle
so much power coming at once! It will then be easy for me to bend him to
my will, and make him my immortal, and almighty servant!

-----

The Orc refused my offer, as expected. So, I've put a curse on the rest
of his race. Soon, they will go insane, and turn into savage barbarians.
That's how I've always seen Orcs, and this is what they will become for real!

-----

The Orc returned to me. But rather than accepting my offer, he attacked me!
Thinking his "mighty" powers would be enough to best me. But he was wrong!
Although stronger than any other mortals, he still hasn't awakened his
full power yet, and therefore, he was no match for me. And now I have cast
the spell on him to force his awakening. It is only a matter of time before
he disappears from this plane. And then I will go to him, and bend him to
my will. He will serve me. Eternally!

-----

It was a success! Avemorsh Gin'Whal has fully awakened! I must be extremely
careful, for his powers are now equal to mine. With him on my side, no one
will be able to stop me, but if he ever turn against me, I could be in serious
trouble. But with his help, I will be able to build the nation that I dream
of, and eliminate those that I judge unworthy! My peoples will become a great
nation, and I shall be worshipped!

It will be the beginning of a great ascension in the ranks of powerful,
immortal beings. It won't be easy. Surely, the Archfiends will send their
mightiest servants to try to kill me. The Gods, too, might disapprove my
actions, and could send Divine Champions and High Celestials to stop me.
Wyrms and Wyrmwraiths might cause me problems as well. But I'm fine with
all of this! I'll work my way up the ranks, and my Demigod servant,
Avemorsh Gin'Whal, will help me do so!
