A BASIC GUIDE TO CRAFTING
-------------------------

Author: Drack The Sturdy, dwarven smith.

Well, the most neophyte smith should at least know some basic
and helpful recipes to craft the most basic weapons and
armors. Of course, I assume you know the basic of combining
and decomposing items. In case you don't, you always combine
stuff when you create something. And decomposing things is
perhaps the easiest way to get your hands on some basic
components!

Here's a few basic stuff:

-- Basic Stuff --

IRON ORE
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: n/a
How to create: n/a

The Iron Ore is a piece of metal used to make some items.
Steel is a lot better for weapons, but iron also have
it's uses. It is commonly found in the first levels of
any caves or dungeons. Because it's a lot more common
than steel, it is used to craft most basic weapons
and armors.

CARBON
Component type: Alchemy
Skills required: n/a
How to create: n/a

The Carbon is a chemical product. It is primarly used to
combine with an Iron Ore to get a Steel Ore.

STEEL ORE
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(1)
How to create: Iron Ore + Carbon

Steel is the most commonly used metal to craft the highest
quality weapons and armors. Forget about those old,
obsolete iron weapons, and get the much better steel!
It will be used to craft the higher quality weapons.

------------------

Now that we covered some basics, how about learning how to
create your first few items?

DAGGER
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(0)
How to create: Iron Ore + Knife Hilt

The most basic crafting you will ever make. Heh, very easy
to craft, but not very powerful if you ask me. Practice, and
then decompose this knife, so you can get a better use for
the iron ore...

SHORT SWORD
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(2)
How to create: Iron Ore + Small Sword Hilt

The short sword, also known as the "Rookie's Knife", heh heh...
Well, you can get it by combining any common iron ore with
a small sword hilt. Can't find a hilt? Take an already made
short sword, decompose it, and there you go, heh heh heh...

LONG SWORD
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(5)
How to create: Iron Ore + Sword Hilt

Ah, the good old Long Sword, the soldier's most commonly used
weapon. A little harder to craft than a Short Sword, but a lot
better.

STEEL LONG SWORD
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(8)
How to create: Steel Ore + Sword Hilt

As I told you, steel make the best weapons. Got your hand on some
steel? Why not scrap that old iron Long Sword to make a much
better one?

METAL CAP
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(5)
How to create: Hard Leather Cap + Scrap Metal

Well, got a low quality leather cap, and some low quality metal?
Wondering what to do with them? Heh, combine them into the
metal cap. Not too great, but it's better than mere leather.

IRON HELM
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(7)
How to create: Metal Cap + Iron Ore

Now that you got a basic Metal Cap, why don't you cover with
good quality iron to make it better? The Iron Helm is a better
and much more useful helm!

STEEL HELM
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(10)
How to create: Metal Cap + Steel Ore

You're a skilled smith, and you don't like the idea of
adding iron to your metal cap? That's right, you want the
much better steel! It offers more protection than the iron
helm!

SOFT LEATHER ARMOUR
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(1)
How to create: Clothes + Leather

You're going on an adventure? You're not going to go down there
with only your sweather, won't you? Pad it with some leather and
you will get a nice suit of leather armor, that will give you
some kind of basic protection.

HARD LEATHER ARMOUR
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(2)
How to create: Soft Leather Armour + Leather

The soft leather armour don't protect you enough? Heh, pad it
with even more leather, and you will get a hard leather armour!
Only slightly heavier, and offers a better protection!

LEATHER SCALE MAIL
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(7)
How to create: Hard Leather Armour + Leather

You like padding leather armours? How about going a little further?
With enough skill and leather, you can create the Leather Scale
Mail, which is a lot better that the hard leather armour! Heavier,
yes, but worth it.

METAL SCALE MAIL
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(11)
How to create: Leather Scale Mail + Scrap Metal

You have your nice suit of Leather Scale Mail, and you also happen
to have some old pieces of metal. Well, fear not, there is a way
to combine them to make the Metal Scale Mail, which offers more
protection than it's leather counterpart!

CHAIN MAIL
Component type: Crafting
Skills required: Crafting(12)
How to create: Metal Scale Mail + Iron Ore

Now, you have your metal scale mail. And if you combine it with
some iron, and use skillful crafting techniques, you can turn
it into a nice suit of chain mail! When you craft your first
chain mail, consider yourself a serious smith!

---------------------

Okay, so that will be it for now. I only mentionned a few of the
basic craftings, and there are a LOT more! And I won't even go into
what you can do with Alchemy... I will let you experiment from now
on!