Day 1: So I have begun my hunt for this new specie of Cockatrices. Unlike
these so-called "Cockatrice Hunters", I actually have experience in fighting
the beasts. They can be tough, but if you come decently prepared, they are
quite beatable. Me, I have a pair of Rings of Earth Resistance, and then an
enchanted suit of armor, and some magical bracers, all of which confers
protection against Earth-elemental attacks. This should give me descent
protection against the Cockatrices' petrification breath. And so, I head
down into the Cockatrices Sanctuary...

Day 2: Phew, what a day... I met two Cockatrices today, and they gave me
quite a bit of trouble. I thought my gear would give me good protection,
but I didn't expect their pecking attacks to be that strong. Still,
I managed to defeat them. But I'm all tired from fighting, and then from
fleeing from the other monsters. I swear, that giant scared the hell
out of me! Just how are we supposed to defeat those things anyway? It would
take an army just to take down one, and a powerful one at that. Phew...
I'm tired. Time to take a rest. I hope that spot is safe enough...

Day 3: More Cockatrices. I almost died when I had to fight three of them
in a row. Thanks goodness I didn't face them all three at once, of they
would have taken me out in no time. I ran away from everything else I
encountered. Monsters and bad peoples down there are just way too strong.
How anyone manages to fight them is beyond me. I am now hiding in a hidden
spot, hoping no monsters will find me.

Day 4: Finally reached what seems to be the bottom of the cave. The only
thing I see around me are some underground mountain chains. A spectacular
sight in it's own right, I will have little time to admire it, considering
the incredibly dangerous fauna inhabiting this cave. A good thing I bought
that Ring of Flying, because there doesn't seem to be any way around the
mountains. Soon, I'll take a flight, and try to find that new specie.
Wait, I believe I hear something. It sounds like a Cockatrice, but it seems
bigger...and different. Could it be the new specie? Yes... yes, I see it
in the sky! All right, I'm putting away this journal, and getting ready
to fight and capture the

*The journal abruptly ends here...*
