POISONOUS POTIONS
-----------------

Written by an anonymous Kobold.

I like alchemy for one thing: poisons. Toxic potions, coating weapons
with poison, using venom and mushrooms to poison water...

For many years, I strived to create the strongest and most
deadly poison ever. And I finally succeeded, although it was
no simple task. Thanks goodness we Kobolds are naturally resistant
to poison, because I ended up poisoning myself quite a few times! So
I wrote this guide to help future fans of poisoning how to create
the best and most deadly poison!

WEAK POISON
Components type: Alchemy
Skill required: 5
How to create: Potion Of Water + Drops of Venom

Pretty much the most basic poison you could ever think of: water
with drops of venom. It looks like edible water in appearence, yet
will cause poisoning to anyone who drinks it. While anyone can drop
venom in water, only a trained alchemist will know how to maximise
the poison's potency through various chemical processes and some
magic. Still, in the end, it still remains a weak, basic poison.

MILD POISON
Components type: Alchemy
Skill required: 15
How to create: Potion of Weak Poison + Drops of Venom

So how do you create a stronger poison? Well, you add more venom!
Sounds simple, but if you limit yourself to that, you're going to be
disappointed. That's why you need to be a trained alchemist in order
to create a perfect chemistry combining water, venom and some magic.
Mixing the three together is no simple task, let me tell you! But
this Mild Poison is much more potent than the simple, weak poison
mentionned above. Still, I wasn't satisfied yet. It still wasn't strong
enough for me. But I found out that venom has it's limits. Adding
more of it had little effect on the poison's potency, so I had to
find something else.

STRONG POISON
Components type: Alchemy
Skill required: 30
How to create: Potion of Mild Poison + Green Dragon Amanita

So I came across this mushroom called the Green Dragon Amanita, a highly
toxic mushroom. I alchemically mixed it with my Mild Potion,
and boy was I surprised! It produced a chemical reaction that tripled
the potency of my poison! Things keeps getting better! Now I bet even a
dragon could be killed by such a potent poison. Hmmm...speaking of
dragons, I always heard that green dragons are the most poisonous
creatures in Portralis(soon, that honor will belong to me!). I wonder
what would happen if I were to combine a green dragon scale with this
new poison...

DEADLY POISON
Components type: Alchemy
Skill required: 50
How to create: Potion of Strong Poison + Lesser Green Dragon Scale

Yes! YES!!! It worked!!! Mixing that poison with the scale of a green
dragon created the most potent poison I've ever seen! This poison is so
deadly just breathing the vapors it emits makes me sick, and I'm a kobold!
I should buy a ring of resist poison or something... Anyway, I've finally
reached my goal of creating the best poison ever. Now, all I need to get
is a pair of draggers, and coat them with this. And then try them out
on some devlings. hehehe...
