**********************************
*           ARCHFIENDS           *
**********************************

Written by an anonymous demonologist.


Everyone has at least heard of demons. Savage creatures from the planes
of hell, destroying and killing everything that stands before them.
Imps and other lesser demons are summoned by evil demon worshippers,
most often in caves and dungeons, and sometimes, these worshippers
performs rituals so that the summoned demons will never return to
their plane of origin, and will be forever bound in our world. Demons
are amongst the most dangerous creatures one can encounter in dungeons.

But Archfiends are different than other lesser demons. They do not
merely haunt a dungeon or a cave. Each Archfiends haunts a part of our
lives, of our society, our feelings, our traditions... They
spill blood and darkness over what we believe in, they represent the
very destruction of our civilization. They are no mere aggressive
beast. They are something far beyond mortal comprehension.

I have studied demonology, along with the demonic tongue. All the names
of the Archfiends are composed of a prefix and a suffix. The prefix
specifies which aspect of the world they corrupt, and the suffix symbolize
their form. Below, I've made a list of some prefix and suffixes I know.
I am sure my list is incomplete, but this should give peoples a good
start.

-- PREFIXES --

Des: Des symbolizes faith, religion, traditions and culture. Archfiends
of this family corrupts our faith, mock our religions and traditions.

Sul: Sul means emotions and feelings, such as love, hope, joy, sadness...
Because they exploit our feelings, demons of Sul can be extremely
seductive and manipulative.

Nyl: Nyl represents the world we live in. Forests, mountains, the sea...
The Archfiends of Nyl are extremely violent and destructive, and enjoys
spreading destruction everywhere.

Van: Van means wisdom and experience. Demons of the Van kind spreads
insanity and rage, and can easily turn even the wisest of monks or priest
into an insane, foolish lunatic.

Col: Col represents pride and self-esteem. Archfiends of Col takes pleasure
in humiliating their victims to the point of despair. They have been known
to turn allmighty archmages, great kings and even celestial heroes into
cowardly wimps.

Jin: Jin represents intelligence and knowledge. Many demon worshippers
who went too far in their rituals eventually entered in contact with a
Jin demon. This short contact was enough to erase all their knowledge
and intelligence.

Kur: Kur represents material possessions, wealth, weapons, houses and
every material aspects of the civilized world. An Archfiend of Kur will
turn the rich into poor, steal from the poor or even shatter all weapons
and equipment of an entire village, before sending his or her legion
of lesser demons.

-- SUFFIXES --

Nor: Nor represents incorporeal and planar beings. Archfiends of Nor
are usually ghost-like in appearance, and shares many of the same
characteristics.

Gor: Gor means giant, frightful, powerful. Demons of Gor are giant, monstrous
creatures.

Rin: Rin means mortal. These Archfiends usually have the appearance of
a mortal race, such as humans or elves.

Yun: Yun means magic. Demons of Yun have bodies made of magic and elements,
and shares some characteristics of elementals.



In addition to the shapes and powers given by their titles, all Archfiends
are gifted with an intelligence that is impossible to describe with words.
The mind of an Archfiend is hundreds or thousands of times stronger than
the wisest and most intelligent mortal. Furthermore, they are omniscient
of their respective domain. A Nyl demon knows everything there is to know
about destruction and war. They know how to destroy anything, they know
the history of every wars that occured, they know how to start any
violent conflicts. A Sul demon can seduce and manipulate any sentient
being with little effort, as it knows all the strength and weaknesses
of a person's feelings.

I do not know if all the possible combinations of prefixes and suffixes
actually exists amongst the Archfiends, but after some research, I have
obtained some information about some of the Archfiends. I cannot confirm
the existance of any of them, but here's the result of my researches:

Des-Gor: The most feared creature amongst the Nimbrayan peoples, the Des-Gor
is the ultimate destroyer of religions. Legends told that the legendary
evil of Nimbraya, Dumos Arikyenzal, once conjured a Des-Gor from hell.
A giant humanoid monster with multiple heads. Each head has the shape of
a god's head, and is always bleeding and rotting, an insult to a nation's
religion. In Nimbraya's case, the monster had Daldumaar's and Dalunia's
heads. It nearly destroyed the entire priesthood and almost all temples,
until Daldumaar finally opened a giant portal, and sent the demon back
in it's plane. It is to be noted that the Des-Gor was never destroyed.
It was simply chased. After all, when the strongest warriors of a nation
derive their powers from religious piety, how do you expect divine and
holy power to even sratch a demon that feeds from religion and faith?

Van-Nor: A monk's worst nightmare, the Van-Nor is a spiritual demon that
can possess it's victim, and devour it's soul. The afflicted victim will
gradually lose it's wisdom and sanity, and will lose all his or her years
of rigorous spiritual training. But the most horrible fact about the
Van-Nor is that the wiser and stronger your mind is, the easier it will
be to be afflicted by the Van-Nor's power. And of course, if you're
weak-minded, you cannot confront an Archfiend in the first place. This
means that if a Van-Nor interferes with your life, you have no choice
but to accept your soon-to-be insanity.

Sul-Rin: Never, I mean, NEVER think that the Sul-Rins are friendly. Yes,
there is the Golden Sul-Rin Shan, who is highly worshipped in Rhyzendal
and elsewhere. But other Sul-Rins are NOT to be worshipped. They usually
appear in the form of an overly seductive man or woman, and looks like
normal humanoids, save for their blue hairs. Unless you are not a sentient
being at all, you will fall under the control of the Sul-Rin. A Sul-Rin
will either seduce you, or manipulate you using all your feelings against
you. Strong, weak, intelligent, dumb, wise, insane... no matter who or
what you are, you will be manipulated by the Sul-Rin, because everyone
has feelings. It is the only requirement to ensure their grasp on your
soul. Finally, I personally do not trust the "Golden Sul-Rin" either.
I'd even say she's a very typical Sul-Rin. Fool peoples into thinking
you're a "good" demon, then turn them into religious followers, and what
do you get? A powerful army ready to fight and die for you, while you
sit on your throne and watch them die and kill your enemies. I'm pretty
much convinced that it's the Golden Sul-Rin's true nature.

Jin-Nor: I have found no proof of their existance, it is merely speculation
on how scary such a creature would be. An incorporeal, ethereal being that
feeds on knowledge. This basically means that it is impossible to know how
to fight such a being. And if you were to find a weakness, it won't work, 
because you 'know' it should work. So it won't. I don't know if it exists...
or is it because it's impossible to know about the existance of this demon?


Finally, I sincerly hope that you will stay far away from demon worshipping.
In the short-term, you will become very powerful...until you come in contact
with an Archfiend. There is nothing a mortal can do against such beings.
Pray hard, stay true to the good deities, and fight the demon worshippers
before they bring Archfiends in our world.
