DAY 1:

Finally discovered the place! That old temple is a place of worship dedicated
to my Master, Kysoroth! When I first came here, I've met some strange cultists
who were chanting some prayers to Master Kysoroth. I was able to talk with
one of them, and he told me about an old, sealed building to the southeast.
Apparently, at the bottom lies a passageway that leads to the inner chambers
of the temple. If that is the case, then this could be very benifical to me
to find this place!

Damn! The building's door is magically sealed, and not even my strongest
spell will unlock it. Hmmm...what to do, what to do? I know... only Kysoroth
can give me the power to unseal this door. I know what I have to do. I have
to become a more faithful servant of the Master. Once he acknowledges my
power, he will let me in! But how can I gain his favor? I know... by causing
a lot of deaths, and creating undead creatures!

Otherwise, this temple is the perfect place to practice my necromantic powers.
I'll probably stay around for a while...

DAY 5:

It's been four days, and I've been slaying some random adventurers in
underground caves, and raising their body as animated bones. But today
I've encountered a kobold who said he was in a new mercenary guild, the
Stealthy Vipers. Hmmm... a guild of Kobolds? Somehow, I am curious about it...
Maybe it's worth taking a look.

DAY 8:

I've reached Jindar. So this is what it's all about! A guild war between
a guild of Kobolds, the Stealthy Vipers, and a guild of Devlings, the
Dragon Lancers! Interesting. Very interesting. With both guilds being in the
slums, the guards won't notice anything. They'll just rule out any violent
intercouses as a "typical" gang war between Kobolds and Devlings. This is
a great opportunity for me! If I pretend to side with the Dragon Lancers,
and can use the bloodshed to my advantage, I can collect tons of dead bodies!
Ooh yes, Master Kysoroth will be pleased! And if I can kill some pesky
Kobolds in the process, then it's all for the better!

DAY 16:

Been 8 days since I've joined the Dragon Lancers. Gaining their trust was a
piece of cake! They lack many good wizards in their guilds, and so I was
easily admitted. Being the most powerful wizard in the guild, I rose up
in ranks very quickly, and became Denzar's closest advisor. This is great!
I will now be able to use my influence to coordinate more attacks against
the Stealthy Vipers. And who cares who wins? It's doesn't matter which side
win or lose, as long as there are dead bodies, my Master will be happy!

DAY 20:

Hmmm... this is bad. Devkar, that mage, one of the few others besides
me, is starting to have suspicions about my motives. He has noticed that
there has been an increase in the attacks against the Vipers, but not an
increase in victories. I think that he suspects that I am sending out many of
our men in suicidal missions against the Vipers. If he discovers the truth,
this could compromise my plans, and put my life in danger. He must be
eliminated as quickly as possible! But how should I do this? Hmmm...
Oh, I know! Undeads, of course! They do not know that I am really a necromancer.
If I summon some powerful undead minions, I can have them attack Devkar, and
they won't have any clues that I'm the one behind this!

DAY 21:

...yup. It worked! That's one less problem, and one step closer to obtaining
the blessing of Master Kysoroth!

DAY 30:

Finally! I did it! After all that hard work, I offered the souls of the dead
to my Master, Kysoroth. He was happy with the sacrifice I brought him, and
rewarded me with some of his power! I can feel it! The necromantic energy
inside my body! The power of a Wyrmwraith! I can't wait to see what kind of
undead minion I can now summon! And this new energy inside my body will make
me nearly impossible to kill! I finally achieved immortality!

Well, that being said, I think I will try out my new powers now. I can't wait
to see what I can do! I believe I will return to that old temple for the time
being. Probably the best place to try out my new tricks!

DAY 33:

Been enjoying my powers for three days. What awesome powers they are!
But now I have some duties for the Dragon Lancers. *sigh*... this is getting
annoying. Now that I have gained what I was seeking, they are of no use to
me anymore. It's time to prepare a Grand Finale, so to speak! A big, final
assault against the Stealthy Vipers! One of the two guilds will die, and then
I can reanimate all those who died, and finish off the survivor. Then I will
have hundreds of dead bodies, hundreds of souls to offer to my Master!

The next few days will be busy for sure... but it will all end soon!

DAY 35:

This is interesting. I have just received word that the Stealthy Vipers have
recruited some sort of super Agent with unexpectedly powerful combat abilities.
Apparently, that Agent has killed Delzo and some other Lancers who were there.

Hmmm... could that Agent be a new threat to my plans? Not that I worry, I am
now immortal after all... but still. Why do I have a bad feeling about this?
I must remain vigilent...

DAY X:

Darn it... been so busy organising the final assault that I forgot just how
long it's been since the last entry! Oh well, not really important I guess.

What's important, however, is that the Agent has been making progress amongst
the Vipers. The Agent has completed alone several tasks that would have been
difficult for an organised group of Vipers to accomplish. Hmmm... maybe
I should try to see just how strong that Agent is. I'm not worried...but...
well, maybe a little I guess? Better play safe here...

DAY Y:

The Agent has defeated the animated undead Vipers that I've sent, and even
that ghost I was controlling. However, I shouldn't worry about this. I have
Kysoroth's magic inside my body, and that makes me invincible!

...but why am I starting to feel anxious?

DAY Z:

Impossible!! The Agent defeated an Unholy Champion! I could count on my fingers
the number of persons who can take them on one-on-one! I must hurry, and launch
the assault on the Vipers Headquarters as soon as possible, before that Agent
foils my plans!

DAY A:

The Agent... defeated me in battle! Even my newfound powers weren't enough!
This is an unexpected, and very bad turn of events. But thanks Kysoroth, the
Agent wasn't able to finish me off, and I was able to reform my body.
I laughed in the Agent's face, and ran away. Immortality be blessed!

...but the Agent will not give up. The Agent will return... and soon.
The Lancers are gone, and the Vipers are greatly weakened with the loss of
two members of their leadership. I believe the time has come for me to return
to the place where it all began: the old temple of Kysoroth. I must use my
newfound powers to unlock the doors of that small building, and then use
the underground tunnels to reach the inner chambers of the temple.

DAY B:

It worked!! The doors opened! The tunnels are full of undead creatures. Ahhh...
it feels like I'm in a heaven created by Kysoroth! Only a matter of time before
I reach the bottom of that cave!

...and so I've reached it. But... it looks like an old laboratory of some kind.
Were they doing experiments with undead creatures around here? And where's the
entrance to the inner chambers? It's not anywhere!!

...could the rumors been false?

DAY C:

I've started digging my way... I swear, those walls are really difficult to
break. It's almost as if there is some kind of magic protecting them!
But I won't give up! I must find a way inside the temple before the Agent
catches up with me! I know the Agent will find me... it's only a matter of
time.
