             /----------------------------------------\
            <  Adventurer's guide to the Middle Earth  >
             \----------------------------------------/
                                   


Middle Earth is vast and mysterious, full of dangers but also full of
rewards for the brave.

New adventurers, should know that pressing < and > can switch
the wilderness view between a normal scale and a larger map. This map
makes travelling safer and faster, but you can't enter wilderness
dungeons from it.


I) The Towns

You start in a small village named Bree in the west of the Middle Earth.
Here you will also find the entrace to the Upper Reaches of Galgals, a
fairly safe and simple dungeon.

When the Upper Reaches of Galgals become too easy for you, and Bree too small,
you might consider going to Lothlorien, the land of Galadriel. Beware that
you should take a lot of food with you for it is a long journey. You'll have
to head south following the Moria mountain's chain, then walk around
the forest of Fangorn to head north to finally find your destination.
The Forest of Mirkwood, another dungeon which is north east
of Lothlorien, is guarded by the mighty Shelob.

If you survive this dangerous dungeon, you should head south, following
the Anduin river. There, near the dark land of Mordor, you will find the
great town of Gondor,
Minas Anor. From there you can want to pay a "visit" to the land of Mordor,
which is east of Minas Anor.

After Mordor you should finally travel to Gondolin, the hidden town of the
Noldor. First go back to Bree, and then from here walk north east and you
will find Gondolin. From this city, you will be able to attack Angband, the
dungeon of Morgoth, which is north west west of Gondolin.


II) Other strange and frightening places

The Maze: right to the west of Bree there is a magical Maze. Many adventurers
that ventured there never came back... It is rumored that a Minotaur is
lurking down there, guarding an ancient and powerful artifact. You
should be powerful enough to visit this place after having finished the
Upper Reaches of the Galgals, but bring along digging equipment and some
means to recall.

You may also wish to investigate the Orc Caves north of Bree; they are
another place suitable for those finished with the Galgals. They also
are rumored to hold great
mysteries.

East of Bree you will find the horrible and frightening Graveyard. Avoid
this place until you are a powerful hero, for the mightiest of undead
are rumored to inhabit this dread place.

The Balrog of Moria guards the Caves of Moria, to the south east of Bree.

During the Second Age of the world there was a great island called
Numenor. The people who dwelt there were wise and powerful, but as time
passed their last kings fell under the power of Sauron. Under Sauron's
orders, they tried to attack Valinor, the blessed land, and for this
Numenor was destroyed, swallowed by the sea. The ruins are still
accessable, far out to sea to the west of Bree.

Many other strange places wait to be explored by the valiant adventurer,
but their locations are secret. You will have to find them yourself!


III) Equipment issues

Beware adventurer! If you plan to go down into the dungeons be prepared. Some
items you will need badly.

First think of some light, maybe a lantern is better than the torches.

Second things to mention are yor combat equipment. Sometimes the weapon and
armor you got from your mentor are not enough for the nasties inside the
dungeons.

And third and most important, always carry a shovel or other digger with you,
because there is many rubble in the dungeons, which you can't carry away with
your hand.
