Misfortune Embrace(Passive)

Effect: Embrace Misfortune, essentially becoming a Nightmare Horror.
Bonus to all stats: (10% of Misfortune)% for every points of alignment below 0.
Power to pierce enemy resistances: 25% of Misfortune.
Bonus to Harm-type attacks damages: 20%
For every points of alignment below 5, you gain 1 permanent Misfortune.
Extra points: +1 multiplier to stats bonus.
              +1 multiplier to power of piercing.
              +1 multiplier to Misfortune increase.
              +20% to Harm-type attacks damages.
              With 5 or more points, Harm-type attacks no longer allows
              monsters to roll a saving throw.

This passive ability will increase all your stats based on both your
Misfortune and your alignment. The lower, the better, so this abililty
is best suited for evil characters. The bonus to stats is based on your
base stats, bonus from items are not counted.

You also gain a chance to bypass any natural resistances a monster may
have. The power is 25% of Misfortune, versus the monster's level and
Nightmare rank(if fighting a Nightmare). This only apply to natural
resistances, not to elite and boss abilities, or counters.

Finally, it will increase the damages of Harm-type attacks, and with
five or more points, monsters will no longer be allowed a saving throw
to prevent the damages.

Also, if you are very evil and have an alignment lower than 5, you
will start having permanent Misfortune, even if you do not wear cursed
items. Beware increasing this ability a lot if your alignment is very
low. It may backfire!

ABOUT NIGHTMARE ABILITIES:

These abilities are a separate set of abilities that you can learn by defeating
Nightmare Horrors, and using their licialhyds. They do not require ability
points to learn, although they do count toward the total abilities limit.
Each Nightmare Horror has a different ability. You may learn a new ability, or
improve a learned one, once every 3 levels. Both normal races and monsters
may learn these abilities.
