SECRET LEVELS
---------------

Congratulations, you have discovered a Secret Level!

Secret Levels are extremely difficult quest levels that will truly push your
character to his/her limits. Though the challenge is great, so are the rewards.
Secret Levels are available in some dungeons, and requires you to find the
proper key to unseal the sealed stairway. Look for them on the last floor
of a specific dungeon.

SCALED ENEMIES

Secret Levels features many scaled enemies, meaning that their power is scaled
with your own level. You can tell an enemy is a scaled enemy by looking at the
color of it's stats, which appears in indigo color. The monster's level will
always be 50% higher than yours, meaning that if you're level 50, it will be
level 75. If you are level 100, it will be level 150. In addition to this,
the natural stats multipliers of these enemies are increased by an additional
percentile amount, which is equal to the monster's level. So if a monster
normally has 130% modifier to strength and 25% modifier to dexterity, for
example, at level 100, the modifiers are now 230% and 125%, respectively.
Additionally, Scaled enemies receives the same modifiers to stats, skills
and HP as "Boss" type enemies that you encounter in dungeons.

Note that scaled enemies do have a minimum level. When entering a Secret Level,
you'll get an introduction screen with the recommended level. If you are below
that level, it's a good idea to leave and level up before proceeding.

CHALLENGE

Enemies range from difficult to completely overwhelming. There may be unique
challenges specific to each Secret Levels as well. It may not always be
possible to simply attack enemies normally and hope to defeat them.
Maybe you will need to use combos of spells and abilities. Certain artifacts
or other items might also help you. Some enemies may have special patterns
that needs to be followed, some details you'll need to pay attention to,
some unique strategies that needs to be used, etc... Everything is possible
in a Secret Level!

Note that it is not recommended that you attempt secret levels until you get
at least a fully levelable equipment, even if you are leveled enough.

DEATH

Fortunately, death is absent from Secret Levels. If you die, your death count
will not increase and you will not suffer the usual penalities for dying.
You will simply be teleported outside the dungeon. And should you recall
to the last level, the secret stairway will be waiting right next to you
for your next attempt. If you got any good items, you are free to keep them!
Because of that, it is always worth it to try beating Secret Levels,
as you have nothing to lose! Also, as you progress, some of this progress
will be marked as completed, so you will now have to start everything over.

REWARDS

In Secret Levels, you will face extremely powerful Unique enemies, as well
as a final Secret Boss at the end. They are extremely difficult, often some
of the most powerful beings that exists in Portralis. But if you manage
to beat them, you will receive great rewards!

For every Unique monsters that you defeat, you gain stats, skill and ability
points as if you had gain X levels, where X is the monster's CR. So if you
defeat a CR5 Unique, for example, you will gain stats points, skill points
and ability points as if you had gained 5 levels. Since you do not actually
gain a level, these are free points, in addition to those that you gain upon
leveling, so this is VERY benefical to your character's development!

If you defeat the Secret Boss at the end, you will receive twice the amount
of points you would receive for a normal Unique enemy. (so in the example
above, you'd gain the equivalent of 10 levels in terms of free stats, skills
and ability points) In addition to this, for every Secret Bosses that you
have defeated in the game, all stats bonus, skills bonus, to_h, to_d, to_a
and base ac that you gain from items will be increased by 20%. This means
that if you defeat a Secret Boss, your items provides 20% more bonus. This
is a unique bonus that cannot be gained in any other ways, and will make
your character a lot stronger!

SCORE

Clearing a secret level will be very benefical to your score! Every secret
levels you clear will raise your score by 25%. This, in addition to the
points you're going to make by defeating the monsters and the boss, will
be very benefical if you're aiming for high score!

TIPS AND TRICKS

- It will take you many, many tries in order to beat a level. Perhaps dozens.
Perhaps hundreds. Don't give up! The game has many possibilities when it
comes to abilities, spells and item customization. Where one combination
failed, another one might work a lot better. If you keep dying, leave and
explore the world for a while, find new treasures, gain new powers,
and come back later.
- Most of the Unique monsters you encounter will have some tricks to pay
attention to. If you just blindy attack them, you will probably lose.
Pay attention to everything they do! Maybe there's a way to avoid that
big, killer attack, or better, a way to use their own attack against them!
- Don't be afraid to try unorthodox strategies. Some strategies that you
would normally laugh at might be the only way for you to defeat the boss.

Good luck!
